The Project Gutenberg EBook of Dracula's Guest, by Bram Stoker

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Dracula's Guest

Author: Bram Stoker

Release Date: November 20, 2003 [EBook #10150]
[Most recently updated: November 26, 2020]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DRACULA'S GUEST ***



Crooken Sands


Mr Arthur Fernlee Markam, who took what was known as the Red House
above the Mains of Crooken, was a London merchant, and being
essentially a cockney, thought it necessary when he went for the summer
holidays to Scotland to provide an entire rig-out as a Highland
chieftain, as manifested in chromolithographs and on the music-hall
stage. He had once seen in the Empire the Great Prince—“The Bounder
King”—bring down the house by appearing as “The MacSlogan of that Ilk,”
and singing the celebrated Scotch song, “There’s naething like haggis
to mak a mon dry!” and he had ever since preserved in his mind a
faithful image of the picturesque and warlike appearance which he
presented. Indeed, if the true inwardness of Mr. Markam’s mind on the
subject of his selection of Aberdeenshire as a summer resort were
known, it would be found that in the foreground of the holiday locality
which his fancy painted stalked the many hued figure of the MacSlogan
of that Ilk. However, be this as it may, a very kind fortune—certainly
so far as external beauty was concerned—led him to the choice of
Crooken Bay. It is a lovely spot, between Aberdeen and Peterhead, just
under the rock-bound headland whence the long, dangerous reefs known as
The Spurs run out into the North Sea. Between this and the “Mains of
Crooken”—a village sheltered by the northern cliffs—lies the deep bay,
backed with a multitude of bent-grown dunes where the rabbits are to be
found in thousands. Thus at either end of the bay is a rocky
promontory, and when the dawn or the sunset falls on the rocks of red
syenite the effect is very lovely. The bay itself is floored with level
sand and the tide runs far out, leaving a smooth waste of hard sand on
which are dotted here and there the stake nets and bag nets of the
salmon fishers. At one end of the bay there is a little group or
cluster of rocks whose heads are raised something above high water,
except when in rough weather the waves come over them green. At low
tide they are exposed down to sand level; and here is perhaps the only
little bit of dangerous sand on this part of the eastern coast. Between
the rocks, which are apart about some fifty feet, is a small quicksand,
which, like the Goodwins, is dangerous only with the incoming tide. It
extends outwards till it is lost in the sea, and inwards till it fades
away in the hard sand of the upper beach. On the slope of the hill
which rises beyond the dunes, midway between the Spurs and the Port of
Crooken, is the Red House. It rises from the midst of a clump of
fir-trees which protect it on three sides, leaving the whole sea front
open. A trim old-fashioned garden stretches down to the roadway, on
crossing which a grassy path, which can be used for light vehicles,
threads a way to the shore, winding amongst the sand hills.

When the Markam family arrived at the Red House after their thirty-six
hours of pitching on the Aberdeen steamer _Ban Righ_ from Blackwall,
with the subsequent train to Yellon and drive of a dozen miles, they
all agreed that they had never seen a more delightful spot. The general
satisfaction was more marked as at that very time none of the family
were, for several reasons, inclined to find favourable anything or any
place over the Scottish border. Though the family was a large one, the
prosperity of the business allowed them all sorts of personal luxuries,
amongst which was a wide latitude in the way of dress. The frequency of
the Markam girls’ new frocks was a source of envy to their bosom
friends and of joy to themselves.

Arthur Fernlee Markam had not taken his family into his confidence
regarding his new costume. He was not quite certain that he should be
free from ridicule, or at least from sarcasm, and as he was sensitive
on the subject, he thought it better to be actually in the suitable
environment before he allowed the full splendour to burst upon them. He
had taken some pains, to insure the completeness of the Highland
costume. For the purpose he had paid many visits to “The Scotch
All-Wool Tartan Clothing Mart” which had been lately established in
Copthall-court by the Messrs. MacCallum More and Roderick MacDhu. He
had anxious consultations with the head of the firm—MacCallum as he
called himself, resenting any such additions as “Mr.” or “Esquire.” The
known stock of buckles, buttons, straps, brooches and ornaments of all
kinds were examined in critical detail; and at last an eagle’s feather
of sufficiently magnificent proportions was discovered, and the
equipment was complete. It was only when he saw the finished costume,
with the vivid hues of the tartan seemingly modified into comparative
sobriety by the multitude of silver fittings, the cairngorm brooches,
the philibeg, dirk and sporran that he was fully and absolutely
satisfied with his choice. At first he had thought of the Royal Stuart
dress tartan, but abandoned it on the MacCallum pointing out that if he
should happen to be in the neighbourhood of Balmoral it might lead to
complications. The MacCallum, who, by the way, spoke with a remarkable
cockney accent, suggested other plaids in turn; but now that the other
question of accuracy had been raised, Mr. Markam foresaw difficulties
if he should by chance find himself in the locality of the clan whose
colours he had usurped. The MacCallum at last undertook to have, at
Markam’s expense, a special pattern woven which would not be exactly
the same as any existing tartan, though partaking of the
characteristics of many. It was based on the Royal Stuart, but
contained suggestions as to simplicity of pattern from the Macalister
and Ogilvie clans, and as to neutrality of colour from the clans of
Buchanan, Macbeth, Chief of Macintosh and Macleod. When the specimen
had been shown to Markam he had feared somewhat lest it should strike
the eye of his domestic circle as gaudy; but as Roderick MacDhu fell
into perfect ecstasies over its beauty he did not make any objection to
the completion of the piece. He thought, and wisely, that if a genuine
Scotchman like MacDhu liked it, it must be right—especially as the
junior partner was a man very much of his own build and appearance.
When the MacCallum was receiving his cheque—which, by the way, was a
pretty stiff one—he remarked:

“I’ve taken the liberty of having some more of the stuff woven in case
you or any of your friends should want it.” Markam was gratified, and
told him that he should be only too happy if the beautiful stuff which
they had originated between them should become a favourite, as he had
no doubt it would in time. He might make and sell as much as he would.

Markam tried the dress on in his office one evening after the clerks
had all gone home. He was pleased, though a little frightened, at the
result. The MacCallum had done his work thoroughly, and there was
nothing omitted that could add to the martial dignity of the wearer.

“I shall not, of course, take the claymore and the pistols with me on
ordinary occasions,” said Markam to himself as he began to undress. He
determined that he would wear the dress for the first time on landing
in Scotland, and accordingly on the morning when the _Ban Righ_ was
hanging off the Girdle Ness lighthouse, waiting for the tide to enter
the port of Aberdeen, he emerged from his cabin in all the gaudy
splendour of his new costume. The first comment he heard was from one
of his own sons, who did not recognise him at first.

“Here’s a guy! Great Scott! It’s the governor!” And the boy fled
forthwith and tried to bury his laughter under a cushion in the saloon.
Markam was a good sailor and had not suffered from the pitching of the
boat, so that his naturally rubicund face was even more rosy by the
conscious blush which suffused his cheeks when he had found himself at
once the cynosure of all eyes. He could have wished that he had not
been so bold for he knew from the cold that there was a big bare spot
under one side of his jauntily worn Glengarry cap. However, he faced
the group of strangers boldly. He was not, outwardly, upset even when
some of the comments reached his ears.

“He’s off his bloomin’ chump,” said a cockney in a suit of exaggerated
plaid.

“There’s flies on him,” said a tall thin Yankee, pale with
sea-sickness, who was on his way to take up his residence for a time as
close as he could get to the gates of Balmoral.

“Happy thought! Let us fill our mulls; now’s the chance!” said a young
Oxford man on his way home to Inverness. But presently Mr. Markam heard
the voice of his eldest daughter.

“Where is he? Where is he?” and she came tearing along the deck with
her hat blowing behind her. Her face showed signs of agitation, for her
mother had just been telling her of her father’s condition; but when
she saw him she instantly burst into laughter so violent that it ended
in a fit of hysterics. Something of the same kind happened to each of
the other children. When they had all had their turn Mr. Markam went to
his cabin and sent his wife’s maid to tell each member of the family
that he wanted to see them at once. They all made their appearance,
suppressing their feelings as well as they could. He said to them very
quietly:

“My dears, don’t I provide you all with ample allowances?”

“Yes, father!” they all answered gravely, “no one could be more
generous!”

“Don’t I let you dress as you please?”

“Yes, father!”—this a little sheepishly.

“Then, my dears, don’t you think it would be nicer and kinder of you
not to try and make me feel uncomfortable, even if I do assume a dress
which is ridiculous in your eyes, though quite common enough in the
country where we are about to sojourn?” There was no answer except that
which appeared in their hanging heads. He was a good father and they
all knew it. He was quite satisfied and went on:

“There, now, run away and enjoy yourselves! We shan’t have another word
about it.” Then he went on deck again and stood bravely the fire of
ridicule which he recognised around him, though nothing more was said
within his hearing.

The astonishment and the amusement which his get-up occasioned on the
_Ban Righ_ was, however, nothing to that which it created in Aberdeen.
The boys and loafers, and women with babies, who waited at the landing
shed, followed _en masse_ as the Markam party took their way to the
railway station; even the porters with their old-fashioned knots and
their new-fashioned barrows, who await the traveller at the foot of the
gang-plank, followed in wondering delight. Fortunately the Peterhead
train was just about to start, so that the martyrdom was not
unnecessarily prolonged. In the carriage the glorious Highland costume
was unseen, and as there were but few persons at the station at Yellon,
all went well there. When, however, the carriage drew near the Mains of
Crooken and the fisher folk had run to their doors to see who it was
that was passing, the excitement exceeded all bounds. The children with
one impulse waved their bonnets and ran shouting behind the carriage;
the men forsook their nets and their baiting and followed; the women
clutched their babies, and followed also. The horses were tired after
their long journey to Yellon and back, and the hill was steep, so that
there was ample time for the crowd to gather and even to pass on ahead.

Mrs. Markam and the elder girls would have liked to make some protest
or to do something to relieve their feelings of chagrin at the ridicule
which they saw on all faces, but there was a look of fixed
determination on the face of the seeming Highlander which awed them a
little, and they were silent. It might have been that the eagle’s
feather, even when arising above the bald head, the cairngorm brooch
even on the fat shoulder, and the claymore, dirk and pistols, even when
belted round the extensive paunch and protruding from the stocking on
the sturdy calf, fulfilled their existence as symbols of martial and
terrifying import! When the party arrived at the gate of the Red House
there awaited them a crowd of Crooken inhabitants, hatless and
respectfully silent; the remainder of the population was painfully
toiling up the hill. The silence was broken by only one sound, that of
a man with a deep voice.

“Man! but he’s forgotten the pipes!”

The servants had arrived some days before, and all things were in
readiness. In the glow consequent on a good lunch after a hard journey
all the disagreeables of travel and all the chagrin consequent on the
adoption of the obnoxious costume were forgotten.

That afternoon Markam, still clad in full array, walked through the
Mains of Crooken. He was all alone, for, strange to say, his wife and
both daughters had sick headaches, and were, as he was told, lying down
to rest after the fatigue of the journey. His eldest son, who claimed
to be a young man, had gone out by himself to explore the surroundings
of the place, and one of the boys could not be found. The other boy, on
being told that his father had sent for him to come for a walk, had
managed—by accident, of course—to fall into the water butt, and had to
be dried and rigged out afresh. His clothes not having been as yet
unpacked this was of course impossible without delay.

Mr. Markam was not quite satisfied with his walk. He could not meet any
of his neighbours. It was not that there were not enough people about,
for every house and cottage seemed to be full; but the people when in
the open were either in their doorways some distance behind him, or on
the roadway a long distance in front. As he passed he could see the
tops of heads and the whites of eyes in the windows or round the
corners of doors. The only interview which he had was anything but a
pleasant one. This was with an odd sort of old man who was hardly ever
heard to speak except to join in the “Amens” in the meeting-house. His
sole occupation seemed to be to wait at the window of the post-office
from eight o’clock in the morning till the arrival of the mail at one,
when he carried the letter-bag to a neighbouring baronial castle. The
remainder of his day was spent on a seat in a draughty part of the
port, where the offal of the fish, the refuse of the bait, and the
house rubbish was thrown, and where the ducks were accustomed to hold
high revel.

When Saft Tammie beheld him coming he raised his eyes, which were
generally fixed on the nothing which lay on the roadway opposite his
seat, and, seeming dazzled as if by a burst of sunshine, rubbed them
and shaded them with his hand. Then he started up and raised his hand
aloft in a denunciatory manner as he spoke:—

“‘Vanity of vanities, saith the preacher. All is vanity.’ Mon, be
warned in time! ‘Behold the lilies of the field, they toil not, neither
do they spin, yet Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one of
these.’ Mon! Mon! Thy vanity is as the quicksand which swallows up all
which comes within its spell. Beware vanity! Beware the quicksand,
which yawneth for thee, and which will swallow thee up! See thyself!
Learn thine own vanity! Meet thyself face to face, and then in that
moment thou shalt learn the fatal force of thy vanity. Learn it, know
it, and repent ere the quicksand swallow thee!” Then without another
word he went back to his seat and sat there immovable and
expressionless as before.

Markam could not but feel a little upset by this tirade. Only that it
was spoken by a seeming madman, he would have put it down to some
eccentric exhibition of Scottish humour or impudence; but the gravity
of the message—for it seemed nothing else—made such a reading
impossible. He was, however, determined not to give in to ridicule, and
although he had not yet seen anything in Scotland to remind him even of
a kilt, he determined to wear his Highland dress. When he returned
home, in less than half-an-hour, he found that every member of the
family was, despite the headaches, out taking a walk. He took the
opportunity afforded by their absence of locking himself in his
dressing-room, took off the Highland dress, and, putting on a suit of
flannels, lit a cigar and had a snooze. He was awakened by the noise of
the family coming in, and at once donning his dress made his appearance
in the drawing-room for tea.

He did not go out again that afternoon; but after dinner he put on his
dress again—he had, of course dressed for dinner as usual—and went by
himself for a walk on the sea-shore. He had by this time come to the
conclusion that he would get by degrees accustomed to the Highland
dress before making it his ordinary wear. The moon was up and he easily
followed the path through the sand-hills, and shortly struck the shore.
The tide was out and the beach firm as a rock, so he strolled
southwards to nearly the end of the bay. Here he was attracted by two
isolated rocks some little way out from the edge of the dunes, so he
strolled towards them. When he reached the nearest one he climbed it,
and, sitting there elevated some fifteen or twenty feet over the waste
of sand, enjoyed the lovely, peaceful prospect. The moon was rising
behind the headland of Pennyfold, and its light was just touching the
top of the furthermost rock of the Spurs some three-quarters of a mile
out; the rest of the rocks were in dark shadow. As the moon rose over
the headland, the rocks of the Spurs and then the beach by degrees
became flooded with light.

For a good while Mr. Markam sat and looked at the rising moon and the
growing area of light which followed its rise. Then he turned and faced
eastwards and sat with his chin in his hand looking seawards, and
revelling in the peace and beauty and freedom of the scene. The roar of
London—the darkness and the strife and weariness of London life—seemed
to have passed quite away, and he lived at the moment a freer and
higher life. He looked at the glistening water as it stole its way over
the flat waste of sand, coming closer and closer insensibly—the tide
had turned. Presently he heard a distant shouting along the beach very
far off.

“The fishermen calling to each other,” he said to himself and looked
around. As he did so he got a horrible shock, for though just then a
cloud sailed across the moon he saw, in spite of the sudden darkness
around him, his own image. For an instant, on the top of the opposite
rock he could see the bald back of the head and the Glengarry cap with
the immense eagle’s feather. As he staggered back his foot slipped, and
he began to slide down towards the sand between the two rocks. He took
no concern as to falling, for the sand was really only a few feet below
him, and his mind was occupied with the figure or simulacrum of
himself, which had already disappeared. As the easiest way of reaching
_terra firma_ he prepared to jump the remainder of the distance. All
this had taken but a second, but the brain works quickly, and even as
he gathered himself for the spring he saw the sand below him lying so
marbly level shake and shiver in an odd way. A sudden fear overcame
him; his knees failed, and instead of jumping he slid miserably down
the rock, scratching his bare legs as he went. His feet touched the
sand—went through it like water—and he was down below his knees before
he realised that he was in a quicksand. Wildly he grasped at the rock
to keep himself from sinking further, and fortunately there was a
jutting spur or edge which he was able to grasp instinctively. To this
he clung in grim desperation. He tried to shout, but his breath would
not come, till after a great effort his voice rang out. Again he
shouted, and it seemed as if the sound of his own voice gave him new
courage, for he was able to hold on to the rock for a longer time than
he thought possible—though he held on only in blind desperation. He
was, however, beginning to find his grasp weakening, when, joy of joys!
his shout was answered by a rough voice from just above him.

“God be thankit, I’m nae too late!” and a fisherman with great
thigh-boots came hurriedly climbing over the rock. In an instant he
recognised the gravity of the danger, and with a cheering “Haud fast,
mon! I’m comin’!” scrambled down till he found a firm foothold. Then
with one strong hand holding the rock above, he leaned down, and
catching Markam’s wrist, called out to him, “Haud to me, mon! Haud to
me wi’ ither hond!”

Then he lent his great strength, and with a steady, sturdy pull,
dragged him out of the hungry quicksand and placed him safe upon the
rock. Hardly giving him time to draw breath, he pulled and pushed
him—never letting him go for an instant—over the rock into the firm
sand beyond it, and finally deposited him, still shaking from the
magnitude of his danger, high upon the beach. Then he began to speak:

“Mon! but I was just in time. If I had no laucht at yon foolish lads
and begun to rin at the first you’d a bin sinkin’ doon to the bowels o’
the airth be the noo! Wully Beagrie thocht you was a ghaist, and Tom
MacPhail swore ye was only like a goblin on a puddick-steel! ‘Na!’ said
I. ‘Yon’s but the daft Englishman—the loony that had escapit frae the
waxwarks.’ I was thinkin’ that bein’ strange and silly—if not a
whole-made feel—ye’d no ken the ways o’ the quicksan’! I shouted till
warn ye, and then ran to drag ye aff, if need be. But God be thankit,
be ye fule or only half-daft wi’ yer vanity, that I was no that late!”
and he reverently lifted his cap as he spoke.

Mr. Markam was deeply touched and thankful for his escape from a
horrible death; but the sting of the charge of vanity thus made once
more against him came through his humility. He was about to reply
angrily, when suddenly a great awe fell upon him as he remembered the
warning words of the half-crazy letter-carrier: “Meet thyself face to
face, and repent ere the quicksand shall swallow thee!”

Here, too, he remembered the image of himself that he had seen and the
sudden danger from the deadly quicksand that had followed. He was
silent a full minute, and then said:

“My good fellow, I owe you my life!”

The answer came with reverence from the hardy fisherman, “Na! Na! Ye
owe that to God; but, as for me, I’m only too glad till be the humble
instrument o’ His mercy.”

“But you will let me thank you,” said Mr. Markam, taking both the great
hands of his deliverer in his and holding them tight. “My heart is too
full as yet, and my nerves are too much shaken to let me say much; but,
believe me, I am very, very grateful!” It was quite evident that the
poor old fellow was deeply touched, for the tears were running down his
cheeks.

The fisherman said, with a rough but true courtesy:

“Ay, sir! thank me and ye will—if it’ll do yer poor heart good. An’ I’m
thinking that if it were me I’d be thankful too. But, sir, as for me I
need no thanks. I am glad, so I am!”

That Arthur Fernlee Markam was really thankful and grateful was shown
practically later on. Within a week’s time there sailed into Port
Crooken the finest fishing smack that had ever been seen in the harbour
of Peterhead. She was fully found with sails and gear of all kinds, and
with nets of the best. Her master and men went away by the coach, after
having left with the salmon-fisher’s wife the papers which made her
over to him.

As Mr. Markam and the salmon-fisher walked together along the shore the
former asked his companion not to mention the fact that he had been in
such imminent danger, for that it would only distress his dear wife and
children. He said that he would warn them all of the quicksand, and for
that purpose he, then and there, asked questions about it till he felt
that his information on the subject was complete. Before they parted he
asked his companion if he had happened to see a second figure, dressed
like himself on the other rock as he had approached to succour him.

“Na! Na!” came the answer, “there is nae sic another fule in these
parts. Nor has there been since the time o’ Jamie Fleeman—him that was
fule to the Laird o’ Udny. Why, mon! sic a heathenish dress as ye have
on till ye has nae been seen in these pairts within the memory o’ mon.
An’ I’m thinkin’ that sic a dress never was for sittin’ on the cauld
rock, as ye done beyont. Mon! but do ye no fear the rheumatism or the
lumbagy wi’ floppin’ doon on to the cauld stanes wi’ yer bare flesh? I
was thinking that it was daft ye waur when I see ye the mornin’ doon be
the port, but it’s fule or eediot ye maun be for the like o’ thot!” Mr.
Markam did not care to argue the point, and as they were now close to
his own home he asked the salmon-fisher to have a glass of whisky—which
he did—and they parted for the night. He took good care to warn all his
family of the quicksand, telling them that he had himself been in some
danger from it.

All that night he never slept. He heard the hours strike one after the
other; but try how he would he could not get to sleep. Over and over
again he went through the horrible episode of the quicksand, from the
time that Saft Tammie had broken his habitual silence to preach to him
of the sin of vanity and to warn him. The question kept ever arising in
his mind: “Am I then so vain as to be in the ranks of the foolish?” and
the answer ever came in the words of the crazy prophet: “‘Vanity of
vanities! All is vanity.’ Meet thyself face to face, and repent ere the
quicksand shall swallow thee!” Somehow a feeling of doom began to shape
itself in his mind that he would yet perish in that same quicksand, for
there he had already met himself face to face.

In the grey of the morning he dozed off, but it was evident that he
continued the subject in his dreams, for he was fully awakened by his
wife, who said:

“Do sleep quietly! That blessed Highland suit has got on your brain.
Don’t talk in your sleep, if you can help it!” He was somehow conscious
of a glad feeling, as if some terrible weight had been lifted from him,
but he did not know any cause of it. He asked his wife what he had said
in his sleep, and she answered:

“You said it often enough, goodness knows, for one to remember it—‘Not
face to face! I saw the eagle plume over the bald head! There is hope
yet! Not face to face!’ Go to sleep! Do!” And then he did go to sleep,
for he seemed to realise that the prophecy of the crazy man had not yet
been fulfilled. He had not met himself face to face—as yet at all
events.

He was awakened early by a maid who came to tell him that there was a
fisherman at the door who wanted to see him. He dressed himself as
quickly as he could—for he was not yet expert with the Highland
dress—and hurried down, not wishing to keep the salmon-fisher waiting.
He was surprised and not altogether pleased to find that his visitor
was none other than Saft Tammie, who at once opened fire on him:

“I maun gang awa’ t’ the post; but I thocht that I would waste an hour
on ye, and ca’ roond just to see if ye waur still that fou wi’ vanity
as on the nicht gane by. An I see that ye’ve no learned the lesson.
Well! the time is comin’, sure eneucht! However I have all the time i’
the marnins to my ain sel’, so I’ll aye look roond jist till see how ye
gang yer ain gait to the quicksan’, and then to the de’il! I’m aff till
ma wark the noo!” And he went straightway, leaving Mr. Markam
considerably vexed, for the maids within earshot were vainly trying to
conceal their giggles. He had fairly made up his mind to wear on that
day ordinary clothes, but the visit of Saft Tammie reversed his
decision. He would show them all that he was not a coward, and he would
go on as he had begun—come what might. When he came to breakfast in
full martial panoply the children, one and all, held down their heads
and the backs of their necks became very red indeed. As, however, none
of them laughed—except Titus, the youngest boy, who was seized with a
fit of hysterical choking and was promptly banished from the room—he
could not reprove them, but began to break his egg with a sternly
determined air. It was unfortunate that as his wife was handing him a
cup of tea one of the buttons of his sleeve caught in the lace of her
morning wrapper, with the result that the hot tea was spilt over his
bare knees. Not unnaturally, he made use of a swear word, whereupon his
wife, somewhat nettled, spoke out:

“Well, Arthur, if you will make such an idiot of yourself with that
ridiculous costume what else can you expect? You are not accustomed to
it—and you never will be!” In answer he began an indignant speech with:
“Madam!” but he got no further, for now that the subject was broached,
Mrs. Markam intended to have her say out. It was not a pleasant say,
and, truth to tell, it was not said in a pleasant manner. A wife’s
manner seldom is pleasant when she undertakes to tell what she
considers “truths” to her husband. The result was that Arthur Fernlee
Markam undertook, then and there, that during his stay in Scotland he
would wear no other costume than the one she abused. Woman-like his
wife had the last word—given in this case with tears:

“Very well, Arthur! Of course you will do as you choose. Make me as
ridiculous as you can, and spoil the poor girls’ chances in life. Young
men don’t seem to care, as a general rule, for an idiot father-in-law!
But I must warn you that your vanity will some day get a rude shock—if
indeed you are not before then in an asylum or dead!”

It was manifest after a few days that Mr. Markam would have to take the
major part of his outdoor exercise by himself. The girls now and again
took a walk with him, chiefly in the early morning or late at night, or
on a wet day when there would be no one about; they professed to be
willing to go out at all times, but somehow something always seemed to
occur to prevent it. The boys could never be found at all on such
occasions, and as to Mrs. Markam she sternly refused to go out with him
on any consideration so long as he should continue to make a fool of
himself. On the Sunday he dressed himself in his habitual broadcloth,
for he rightly felt that church was not a place for angry feelings; but
on Monday morning he resumed his Highland garb. By this time he would
have given a good deal if he had never thought of the dress, but his
British obstinacy was strong, and he would not give in. Saft Tammie
called at his house every morning, and, not being able to see him nor
to have any message taken to him, used to call back in the afternoon
when the letter-bag had been delivered and watched for his going out.
On such occasions he never failed to warn him against his vanity in the
same words which he had used at the first. Before many days were over
Mr. Markam had come to look upon him as little short of a scourge.

By the time the week was out the enforced partial solitude, the
constant chagrin, and the never-ending brooding which was thus
engendered, began to make Mr. Markam quite ill. He was too proud to
take any of his family into his confidence since they had in his view
treated him very badly. Then he did not sleep well at night, and when
he did sleep he had constantly bad dreams. Merely to assure himself
that his pluck was not failing him he made it a practice to visit the
quicksand at least once every day; he hardly ever failed to go there
the last thing at night. It was perhaps this habit that wrought the
quicksand with its terrible experience so perpetually into his dreams.
More and more vivid these became, till on waking at times he could
hardly realise that he had not been actually in the flesh to visit the
fatal spot. He sometimes thought that he might have been walking in his
sleep.

One night his dream was so vivid that when he awoke he could not
believe that it had only been a dream. He shut his eyes again and
again, but each time the vision, if it was a vision, or the reality, if
it was a reality, would rise before him. The moon was shining full and
yellow over the quicksand as he approached it; he could see the expanse
of light shaken and disturbed and full of black shadows as the liquid
sand quivered and trembled and wrinkled and eddied as was its wont
between its pauses of marble calm. As he drew close to it another
figure came towards it from the opposite side with equal footsteps. He
saw that it was his own figure, his very self, and in silent terror,
compelled by what force he knew not, he advanced—charmed as the bird is
by the snake, mesmerised or hypnotised—to meet this other self. As he
felt the yielding sand closing over him he awoke in the agony of death,
trembling with fear, and, strange to say, with the silly man’s prophecy
seeming to sound in his ears: “‘Vanity of vanities! All is vanity!’ See
thyself and repent ere the quicksand swallow thee!”

So convinced was he that this was no dream that he arose, early as it
was, and dressing himself without disturbing his wife took his way to
the shore. His heart fell when he came across a series of footsteps on
the sands, which he at once recognised as his own. There was the same
wide heel, the same square toe; he had no doubt now that he had
actually been there, and half horrified, and half in a state of dreamy
stupor, he followed the footsteps, and found them lost in the edge of
the yielding quicksand. This gave him a terrible shock, for there were
no return steps marked on the sand, and he felt that there was some
dread mystery which he could not penetrate, and the penetration of
which would, he feared, undo him.

In this state of affairs he took two wrong courses. Firstly he kept his
trouble to himself, and, as none of his family had any clue to it,
every innocent word or expression which they used supplied fuel to the
consuming fire of his imagination. Secondly he began to read books
professing to bear upon the mysteries of dreaming and of mental
phenomena generally, with the result that every wild imagination of
every crank or half-crazy philosopher became a living germ of unrest in
the fertilising soil of his disordered brain. Thus negatively and
positively all things began to work to a common end. Not the least of
his disturbing causes was Saft Tammie, who had now become at certain
times of the day a fixture at his gate. After a while, being interested
in the previous state of this individual, he made inquiries regarding
his past with the following result.

Saft Tammie was popularly believed to be the son of a laird in one of
the counties round the Firth of Forth. He had been partially educated
for the ministry, but for some cause which no one ever knew threw up
his prospects suddenly, and, going to Peterhead in its days of whaling
prosperity, had there taken service on a whaler. Here off and on he had
remained for some years, getting gradually more and more silent in his
habits, till finally his shipmates protested against so taciturn a
mate, and he had found service amongst the fishing smacks of the
northern fleet. He had worked for many years at the fishing with always
the reputation of being “a wee bit daft,” till at length he had
gradually settled down at Crooken, where the laird, doubtless knowing
something of his family history, had given him a job which practically
made him a pensioner. The minister who gave the information finished
thus:—

“It is a very strange thing, but the man seems to have some odd kind of
gift. Whether it be that ‘second sight’ which we Scotch people are so
prone to believe in, or some other occult form of knowledge, I know
not, but nothing of a disastrous tendency ever occurs in this place but
the men with whom he lives are able to quote after the event some
saying of his which certainly appears to have foretold it. He gets
uneasy or excited—wakes up, in fact—when death is in the air!”

This did not in any way tend to lessen Mr. Markam’s concern, but on the
contrary seemed to impress the prophecy more deeply on his mind. Of all
the books which he had read on his new subject of study none interested
him so much as a German one _Die Döppleganger_, by Dr. Heinrich von
Aschenberg, formerly of Bonn. Here he learned for the first time of
cases where men had led a double existence—each nature being quite
apart from the other—the body being always a reality with one spirit,
and a simulacrum with the other. Needless to say that Mr. Markam
realised this theory as exactly suiting his own case. The glimpse which
he had of his own back the night of his escape from the quicksand—his
own footmarks disappearing into the quicksand with no return steps
visible—the prophecy of Saft Tammie about his meeting himself and
perishing in the quicksand—all lent aid to the conviction that he was
in his own person an instance of the döppleganger. Being then conscious
of a double life he took steps to prove its existence to his own
satisfaction. To this end on one night before going to bed he wrote his
name in chalk on the soles of his shoes. That night he dreamed of the
quicksand, and of his visiting it—dreamed so vividly that on walking in
the grey of the dawn he could not believe that he had not been there.
Arising, without disturbing his wife, he sought his shoes.

The chalk signatures were undisturbed! He dressed himself and stole out
softly. This time the tide was in, so he crossed the dunes and struck
the shore on the further side of the quicksand. There, oh, horror of
horrors! he saw his own footprints dying into the abyss!

He went home a desperately sad man. It seemed incredible that he, an
elderly commercial man, who had passed a long and uneventful life in
the pursuit of business in the midst of roaring, practical London,
should thus find himself enmeshed in mystery and horror, and that he
should discover that he had two existences. He could not speak of his
trouble even to his own wife, for well he knew that she would at once
require the fullest particulars of that other life—the one which she
did not know; and that she would at the start not only imagine but
charge him with all manner of infidelities on the head of it. And so
his brooding grew deeper and deeper still. One evening—the tide then
going out and the moon being at the full—he was sitting waiting for
dinner when the maid announced that Saft Tammie was making a
disturbance outside because he would not be let in to see him. He was
very indignant, but did not like the maid to think that he had any fear
on the subject, and so told her to bring him in. Tammie entered,
walking more briskly than ever with his head up and a look of vigorous
decision in the eyes that were so generally cast down. As soon as he
entered he said:

“I have come to see ye once again—once again; and there ye sit, still
just like a cockatoo on a pairch. Weel, mon, I forgie ye! Mind ye that,
I forgie ye!” And without a word more he turned and walked out of the
house, leaving the master in speechless indignation.

After dinner he determined to pay another visit to the quicksand—he
would not allow even to himself that he was afraid to go. And so, about
nine o’clock, in full array, he marched to the beach, and passing over
the sands sat on the skirt of the nearer rock. The full moon was behind
him and its light lit up the bay so that its fringe of foam, the dark
outline of the headland, and the stakes of the salmon-nets were all
emphasised. In the brilliant yellow glow the lights in the windows of
Port Crooken and in those of the distant castle of the laird trembled
like stars through the sky. For a long time he sat and drank in the
beauty of the scene, and his soul seemed to feel a peace that it had
not known for many days. All the pettiness and annoyance and silly
fears of the past weeks seemed blotted out, and a new holy calm took
the vacant place. In this sweet and solemn mood he reviewed his late
action calmly, and felt ashamed of himself for his vanity and for the
obstinacy which had followed it. And then and there he made up his mind
that the present would be the last time he would wear the costume which
had estranged him from those whom he loved, and which had caused him so
many hours and days of chagrin, vexation, and pain.

But almost as soon as he arrived at this conclusion another voice
seemed to speak within him and mockingly to ask him if he should ever
get the chance to wear the suit again—that it was too late—he had
chosen his course and must now abide the issue.

“It is not too late,” came the quick answer of his better self; and
full of the thought, he rose up to go home and divest himself of the
now hateful costume right away. He paused for one look at the beautiful
scene. The light lay pale and mellow, softening every outline of rock
and tree and house-top, and deepening the shadows into velvety-black,
and lighting, as with a pale flame, the incoming tide, that now crept
fringe-like across the flat waste of sand. Then he left the rock and
stepped out for the shore.

But as he did so a frightful spasm of horror shook him, and for an
instant the blood rushing to his head shut out all the light of the
full moon. Once more he saw that fatal image of himself moving beyond
the quicksand from the opposite rock to the shore. The shock was all
the greater for the contrast with the spell of peace which he had just
enjoyed; and, almost paralysed in every sense, he stood and watched the
fatal vision and the wrinkly, crawling quicksand that seemed to writhe
and yearn for something that lay between. There could be no mistake
this time, for though the moon behind threw the face into shadow he
could see there the same shaven cheeks as his own, and the small stubby
moustache of a few weeks’ growth. The light shone on the brilliant
tartan, and on the eagle’s plume. Even the bald space at one side of
the Glengarry cap glistened, as did the cairngorm brooch on the
shoulder and the tops of the silver buttons. As he looked he felt his
feet slightly sinking, for he was still near the edge of the belt of
quicksand, and he stepped back. As he did so the other figure stepped
forward, so that the space between them was preserved.

So the two stood facing each other, as though in some weird
fascination; and in the rushing of the blood through his brain Markam
seemed to hear the words of the prophecy: “See thyself face to face,
and repent ere the quicksand swallow thee.” He did stand face to face
with himself, he had repented—and now he was sinking in the quicksand!
The warning and prophecy were coming true.

Above him the seagulls screamed, circling round the fringe of the
incoming tide, and the sound being entirely mortal recalled him to
himself. On the instant he stepped back a few quick steps, for as yet
only his feet were merged in the soft sand. As he did so the other
figure stepped forward, and coming within the deadly grip of the
quicksand began to sink. It seemed to Markam that he was looking at
himself going down to his doom, and on the instant the anguish of his
soul found vent in a terrible cry. There was at the same instant a
terrible cry from the other figure, and as Markam threw up his hands
the figure did the same. With horror-struck eyes he saw him sink deeper
into the quicksand; and then, impelled by what power he knew not, he
advanced again towards the sand to meet his fate. But as his more
forward foot began to sink he heard again the cries of the seagulls
which seemed to restore his benumbed faculties. With a mighty effort he
drew his foot out of the sand which seemed to clutch it, leaving his
shoe behind, and then in sheer terror he turned and ran from the place,
never stopping till his breath and strength failed him, and he sank
half swooning on the grassy path through the sandhills.


Arthur Markam made up his mind not to tell his family of his terrible
adventure—until at least such time as he should be complete master of
himself. Now that the fatal double—his other self—had been engulfed in
the quicksand he felt something like his old peace of mind.

That night he slept soundly and did not dream at all; and in the
morning was quite his old self. It really seemed as though his newer
and worser self had disappeared for ever; and strangely enough Saft
Tammie was absent from his post that morning and never appeared there
again, but sat in his old place watching nothing, as of old, with
lack-lustre eye. In accordance with his resolution he did not wear his
Highland suit again, but one evening tied it up in a bundle, claymore,
dirk and philibeg and all, and bringing it secretly with him threw it
into the quicksand. With a feeling of intense pleasure he saw it sucked
below the sand, which closed above it into marble smoothness. Then he
went home and announced cheerily to his family assembled for evening
prayers:

“Well! my dears, you will be glad to hear that I have abandoned my idea
of wearing the Highland dress. I see now what a vain old fool I was and
how ridiculous I made myself! You shall never see it again!”

“Where is it, father?” asked one of the girls, wishing to say something
so that such a self-sacrificing announcement as her father’s should not
be passed in absolute silence. His answer was so sweetly given that the
girl rose from her seat and came and kissed him. It was:

“In the quicksand, my dear! and I hope that my worser self is buried
there along with it—for ever.”


The remainder of the summer was passed at Crooken with delight by all
the family, and on his return to town Mr. Markam had almost forgotten
the whole of the incident of the quicksand, and all touching on it,
when one day he got a letter from the MacCallum More which caused him
much thought, though he said nothing of it to his family, and left it,
for certain reasons, unanswered. It ran as follows:—

“The MacCallum More and Roderick MacDhu.
“The Scotch All-Wool Tartan Clothing Mart.
Copthall Court, E.C.,
30th September, 1892.

“Dear Sir,—I trust you will pardon the liberty which I take in writing
to you, but I am desirous of making an inquiry, and I am informed that
you have been sojourning during the summer in Aberdeenshire (Scotland,
N.B.). My partner, Mr. Roderick MacDhu—as he appears for business
reasons on our bill-heads and in our advertisements, his real name
being Emmanuel Moses Marks of London—went early last month to Scotland
(N.B.) for a tour, but as I have only once heard from him, shortly
after his departure, I am anxious lest any misfortune may have befallen
him. As I have been unable to obtain any news of him on making all
inquiries in my power, I venture to appeal to you. His letter was
written in deep dejection of spirit, and mentioned that he feared a
judgment had come upon him for wishing to appear as a Scotchman on
Scottish soil, as he had one moonlight night shortly after his arrival
seen his “wraith”. He evidently alluded to the fact that before his
departure he had procured for himself a Highland costume similar to
that which we had the honour to supply to you, with which, as perhaps
you will remember, he was much struck. He may, however, never have worn
it, as he was, to my own knowledge, diffident about putting it on, and
even went so far as to tell me that he would at first only venture to
wear it late at night or very early in the morning, and then only in
remote places, until such time as he should get accustomed to it.
Unfortunately he did not advise me of his route so that I am in
complete ignorance of his whereabouts; and I venture to ask if you may
have seen or heard of a Highland costume similar to your own having
been seen anywhere in the neighbourhood in which I am told you have
recently purchased the estate which you temporarily occupied. I shall
not expect an answer to this letter unless you can give me some
information regarding my friend and partner, so pray do not trouble to
reply unless there be cause. I am encouraged to think that he may have
been in your neighbourhood as, though his letter is not dated, the
envelope is marked with the postmark of ‘Yellon’ which I find is in
Aberdeenshire, and not far from the Mains of Crooken.

“I have the honour to be, dear sir,
“Yours very respectfully,
“Joshua Sheeny Cohen Benjamin
“(The MacCallum More.)”




End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Dracula's Guest, by Bram Stoker

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DRACULA'S GUEST ***

***** This file should be named 10150-0.txt or 10150-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/0/1/5/10150/

E-text prepared by Bill Keir, Susan Woodring,
and the Project Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading Team
and revised by Jeannie Howse

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
