The Project Gutenberg EBook of Twenty-Three Stories by Twenty and Three
Authors, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Twenty-Three Stories by Twenty and Three Authors

Author: Various

Editor: Ernest Rhys
        Catherine Amy Dawson-Scott

Release Date: June 8, 2020 [EBook #62347]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TWENTY-THREE STORIES, TWENTY-THREE AUTHORS ***




THE CALL OF THE HAND

(A Story of the Balkans)

By LOUIS GOLDING




                                   1




No one knew what sin Nikolai Kupreloff had committed to bring on his
head so terrible a penalty. Year after year his wife and he had prayed
for a child, to their ikons in the tiny basilica in the wood, and when
his wife gave birth at last, it was neither a child nor children. She
had given birth to two little boys, perfectly made, exquisitely
proportioned, but there was a deadly thing had befallen them ... the
tiny right hand of the one was inexorably seized by the left hand of the
other.

The little woodcutter’s cottage of Nikolai lay deeply hidden in the
great pine woods of Lower Serbia, miles from his nearest neighbour. Yet
even in that wild country the fame of the intertwined children travelled
far, and the wise old women from those parts came to see if herbs or
chanting or any of their dark gifts might be of the least avail. They
were no more useful than a real doctor who had studied at Belgrade, was
practising at Monastir, and was stimulated to great interest by the
account of these strange children. The case defied all the arts of black
or white magic, and the interest of the episode flickered and died down.

So it was that Nikolai reconciled himself to the inevitable, and as the
boys grew older he would cross himself devoutly and say: “Thank God, it
might have been a thousand times worse!” They were lads of extraordinary
beauty. Peter and Ivan he called them, Ivan being the lad who held so
irrevocably the wrist of his brother within his fingers. In appearance
they were identical—the light, tough hair and the laughing blue eyes of
the Serbian Slav, sturdy, well-knit limbs, and a sterling robustness of
physique. It was only their parents and themselves who knew that between
them there was one slight but unmistakable mark of distinction—below the
knuckle of Ivan’s thumb was marked dully a little red arrow. In fact, a
stranger might not have known that this abnormal bond existed between
the two brothers as he saw them swinging along under the pines. “What a
loving little pair!” he would exclaim, as he heard them laugh and
chatter in complete harmony, and look into each other’s eyes with the
understanding born of flawless love.

When they were about fifteen years old their mother died, and the father
Nikolai began more and more to remain behind in his cottage attending to
the frugal needs of the little family, while Peter and Ivan, as the
years went on, grew even more skilful in the art of woodcutting; for
Peter wielding the axe in his left hand, Ivan in his right, achieved
such a fine reciprocity of movement, that Nikolai would laugh in his
great yellow beard and mutter: “Truly the ways of God are inscrutable,
for even out of their calamity has He made a great blessing!” The
passing of time only knit closer their perfect intimacy, so that they
almost did not notice when their father Nikolai sickened and died. Now
they were left to their cottage and their woodcutting and their complete
love, the whole being crowned by the splendid physique of young
foresters at twenty-one; so that life, it seemed, had nothing in store
for them but long years of undivided love and content.

Yet even into their seclusion rumours came of the great world beyond.
Now and again they would catch glimpses of the marvels of Salonika in
the eyes of travelled men. They would hear of a city where lovely women,
infinitely more beautiful than the queen of the tousled gypsies who
flickered from time to time along the forest paths, sang upon stages of
golden wood, in gardens full of hanging lights. They would hear of the
sea and glowing ships, and men who spoke low musical languages uttered
in countries beyond the sea.

So it was the brothers determined to leave their woodcutting behind them
for a season and adventure forth into the world of ships and songs and
lovely women.




                                   2




To Peter and Ivan Salonika was a revelation of wonders they barely
thought actual. From a little room in the street of Johann Tschimiski
they saw the multicoloured tides of cosmopolitan humanity sweeping down
from Egnatia Street, down Venizelos Street to the Place de la Concorde.
They would walk along the quay-side past the great hotels to the Jardins
de la Tour Blanche, and were sent into an ecstasy of delight by the
_chic_ little women who smiled archly at these two fair-headed lads from
the up-country, who walked along hand clasped in wrist in so naïve and
rustic a manner. Yet when they entered the Théatre des Variétés at the
White Tower it seemed to them that the very portals of heaven had opened
wide. They would return in a daze of delight to their room and recount
with an almost religious fervour the beauties and enchantments of the
show. Each little Spanish or French girl who came to do her song or
minuet had seemed to them more enchanting than the last. Never a cloud
of disagreement came between them. There was a perfect coincidence in
their tastes, and never, they felt, had their love for each other been
so sympathetic and complete as it was now.

The brothers had no large sum of money at their disposal. The time of
their holiday was drawing to a close. One evening they turned up at the
theatre for the last time, their nerves keyed up to a pitch of delighted
impatience, the more tense as the brothers knew that the next day would
see them on the arduous road back to their Serbian forest. Turn followed
turn with alluring consequence. Then at one stage the music ceased for
some moments and there was an atmosphere of expectance in the air. It
was then that a simple and delightful English girl came half-shyly from
the wings. There was nothing flamboyant in her appearance or her manner.
Yet at once she seemed to seize the house with the graceful and reticent
winsomeness of her song. So she sang her song through, a dainty little
ballad of old-world gardens and fragrant flowers and love unto death.
Peter felt the fingers of Ivan tighten round his wrist. He himself had
been so stirred to his depths by the gentle grace of the girl that it
was with a slight feeling of resentment he realised that Ivan had been
experiencing once again an identical emotion. As he involuntarily moved
away his arm Ivan uttered a slight cry of impatience. He turned round
and looked into Peter’s eyes and found them aflame with a light deeper
than mere appreciation. Peter was aware of his brother’s glance and
looked at Ivan in return to find his face flushed almost as if he were
half-drunk.

That night for the first time in their history there occurred a slight
bickering between the two. No mention of the little English actress
passed between them, but each of them determined that some day, when his
brother’s interest had died away, he should broach the subject and the
possibility of a rediscovery of the English actress at Salonika.

Next day they entrained for Monastir, and a few days later saw them
installed once again in their father’s cottage in the wood.




                                   3




In proportion as the fortunes of the Kupreloff brothers increased,
something that had once existed between them receded further away. The
perfection of their old intimacy became a memory of the past. No longer
did the most minute physical or spiritual experience of the one become
automatically part of his brother’s consciousness. So that now for the
first time their indissoluble partnership became more and more galling.

There was no doubt of it. Everything dated from that last night at
Salonika, when the English girl appeared on the stage. They would still
occasionally revive something of the old fervour as they discussed from
time to time their impressions of the unforgettable holiday. Yet never a
word passed between them concerning the unconscious girl who had
captured both their hearts. At night they would lie awake, each thinking
that the other was asleep. Bitterly, definitely, they would confess to
their own deep hearts: “She is mine, she is mine; I am hers for ever.”
And yet to each their love seemed hopeless beyond recall. There was the
double sting that each of them loved the girl with an intensity reserved
hitherto for his brother; but, if possible, more fatal was the
despairing conviction that no girl could ever love the one of two
brothers to whom the other would remain physically attached till death
carried them both away. As the months passed by the friction between
them increased. They were now in a position to buy land and a little
livestock. But if Peter insisted upon keeping pigs, in the fashion of
the majority of Serbians, Ivan would insist upon cattle. If Peter felt
that he had done enough woodcutting for the day, Ivan felt that the day
was only just beginning.

One night in late autumn Peter lay tossing very heavily in his sleep.
Ivan lay awake, thinking, thinking for ever of the girl, his whole heart
full of rancour against the brother who must for ever prevent the
consummation of his love. Heavily, wearily, Peter heaved on the bed.
Outside the wind was howling. The dreariness of the wind seemed to enter
Peter’s heart. “My little girl,” he murmured, “my little girl! When
shall we meet, my little girl? Never, never, never!” Ivan’s forehead
contracted with hate. He was filled suddenly with a tremendous loathing
of his brother. “Never, never, never!” moaned Peter. Suddenly, obeying a
frantic impulse, Ivan pulled with all his strength away from his
brother’s wrist to which Fate had so viciously fastened him. With a
great scream of pain Peter half leapt from the bed.

“What’s this? What do you mean?” he shouted, his voice thick with pain
and sleep. “Nothing! Nothing! I couldn’t help it! I was dreaming!”
replied Ivan savagely, and the brothers settled down again for the
night.

Night after night the same thing happened. Peter would murmur for ever
in his sleep, “My little girl, when shall we meet? Never, never, never!”
Ivan would lie awake, hatred surging violently through his whole body,
till his eyes would see nothing but flames in the darkness of their
log-built room; and the sound of the branches in the forest would begin
to mutter and moan: “Have done with it, Ivan, have done with it! She is
waiting for you, waiting, always waiting. Have done with it! Have done
with him—with him—with _him_!”

One desolate night towards mid-winter the room was full of the miserable
sleep-cries of Peter. Outside thunder ripped among the clouds. A finger
of lightning came suddenly through the windows and pointed with a
gesture of flame towards the open breast of Peter. A sudden and terrible
thought flooded into Ivan’s soul! Whatever there was of human kindness
and brother-love seemed in one sinister moment to be washed away from
before the onset of the flood. All the branches upon all the trees
shrieked across the night. “We shall be quiet, you shall have rest. She
shall be yours. Have done with him, have done with him!”

A great calm settled down upon Ivan’s soul—the issue was decided, the
issue which had been hovering for so long in his subconsciousness was
decided at last. There was nothing left to do. The mere deed was the
mere snapping of a thread. With his eyes wide open, a terrible silence
laying upon his soul, he stared into the night, waiting, waiting for the
dawn.

Dawn came at last. The brothers washed and took food. There was a long
way to go, far off into the woods. There was almost a tenderness in
Ivan’s attitude towards Peter. What mattered now? The issue was decided;
the gods had taken the thing out of his hands. With their axes swinging
they made their way into the woods, through a day sharp with frost. At
last they arrived at the clearing where they were to continue their
tree-felling. A brazier stood waiting there, and before work started
they lit a fire in preparation for the midday meal. Then they picked up
their axes and set to. Lustily their strokes rang through the wood.
Chime rang upon chime. It was strenuous work, the work of men with
strong muscles and keen eyes.

The morning went by steadily. There was no hate in Ivan’s soul—only a
deadly patience. He knew the moment would come. He knew when the moment
came that he would act. For a few minutes they stopped and wiped their
foreheads. Peter opened his shirt wide and exposed his breast to Ivan.
The quick vision presented itself of Peter heaving darkly in their bed,
the sudden finger of lightning, the naked breast.

“Come!” said Ivan thickly, “let us begin!”

They both took up their positions against a tree. Peter with the axe in
his left hand struck against the tree. Ivan, quick as the lightning
which last night had shown him his way, whirled his axe round, away from
the tree, and the sharp edge went cracking through Peter’s ribs, deep
beyond the heart. A great fountain of blood spurted into the air. A
long, feeble moan left Peter’s lips. Deeper than the axe had cut, his
eyes looked sorrowfully into the soul of Ivan. His weight tottered and
Ivan felt himself following to the ground. There was not a moment to
lose. Again the axe whirled through the air. With the whole of a strong
man’s strength the axe came down upon his own wrist, and down fell the
body of Peter with the hand of his brother indissoluble in death round
his wrist, as it had been indissoluble in life.

The thing he had brought about was too monstrous for Ivan at that moment
to understand. It was only the little things that his ear and eye
seized—the frightened screech of a bird in a tree, the sullen shining of
the little red arrow in the thumb of his own severed hand.

Ivan felt the blood streaming from the stump of his forearm. He knew
that if he did not reassert complete mastery over himself he would bleed
to death. All would be vain—the call of the far girl, the murder, the
last look in Peter’s eyes. He staggered over to the brazier and plunged
his forearm for one swift instant into the embers. Then darkness
overwhelmed him and he fell backward into unutterable night.




                                   4




It was easy enough to explain. Not the least suspicion attached itself
to Ivan. People came from remote cabins and farms to sympathise with the
bereaved brother. What was more likely in the world than that Ivan’s axe
should slide from a knot in the tree and come crashing against Peter,
who, even if he could see the axe coming, could not by any human means
have disengaged himself from his brother. “I always thought something
like this would happen,” people muttered wisely to each other, and shook
their heads and crossed their breasts.

Of course they all understood how Ivan could no longer remain in the
cottage consecrated by memories of his brother. So Ivan sold his
accumulation of timber and his land and what little stock the brothers
had bought, and it was not many weeks after his forearm was healed that
the jangling train from Monastir was bearing him through the Macedonian
hills upon his quest for the English girl at Salonika.

In Salonika she was nowhere to be found. Forlornly he went from
music-hall to music-hall, but she was gone. He haunted even the _cafés
chantants_ along Egnatia Street, even the degenerate _brasseries_ on the
Monastir Road, where the red-costumed women stood upon improvised
platforms and sang to tipsy crowds with the accompaniment of feeble
violins. But there was no trace of her in the whole city. From the
director at the White Tower he learned that perhaps she had proceeded to
Constantinople, perhaps she had returned to Athens, whence the European
artistes generally came to Salonika on their round of the greater
Levantine towns.

With all the fervour and idealism of a mediæval knight Ivan stepped upon
the deck of a Messageries Maritimes boat returning to Marseilles by way
of the Piræus. When the electric train from the harbour landed him at
the station in Athens a mystic conviction filled him that here in this
city, some day, the English girl would be revealed to him. Ambitiously
he first tried the great _Opéra_, but she was not there. The weeks
lengthened into months and failure followed failure, but the mysterious
foreknowledge of his race held up his weary spirits and bade him put
aside despair.

When at last she appeared upon the stage of one of the lesser
music-halls, it was with no great start of surprise or welcome that he
recognised her arrival. It was as if a mother or a sister had slipped
back into the place from which for some reason she had been absent. Her
features had become engraved upon every curve of his brain. She came
upon the stage and filled his life again as naturally as day fills the
place of night. Life became for him a thing of meaning and splendour. He
realised that at last Life was to begin.

He knew little of the half-measures and half-advances of Western
civilisation. He lost no time in appearing before the girl. After only a
few words of difficult apology, with a voice of low and subdued passion
he told her a fragment or two of his tale. It was a broken French that
he talked—the French of which his mother long ago had taught her boys
the few phrases she knew, and which his experiences in Salonika and
Athens during the last few months had greatly improved.

The large grey eyes of the English girl opened wide in wonder as she
listened, fascinated, to the stammering avowals of this tall stranger
from a shadowy land. Half in fright she drew back against the wall of
her wretched little dressing-room, but, even so soon she realised that
the destiny was overwhelming her which was to bring an end to her
wanderings. She consented shyly to his suggestion that she should see
him for a little while next night, and it was with a thrill of delight
and fear she saw his great figure waiting for her at the gate of the
Museum, as the purple Athenian dusk came wandering down from the
Acropolis and cast velvet glooms among the pillars of Pentelican marble.

For years since her mother had died and her father had become a
confirmed drunkard, it was a very lonely life that Mary Weston had led.
She had no great talent, and she had drifted from theatre to theatre
upon the Continent, for to her England was a place of no kindly
memories. Ivan Kupreloff began to mean for her what her mother had meant
before she died and her father before he had taken to drink.

A few months had passed only. There was no escape from Ivan. There was
nothing importunate about him, but he was irresistible. He was Life.
Proudly he realised that he had conquered her. To world’s end and Time’s
end she was his own.

They were married at length. Athens and all the cities she had known,
the Serbian wood and the murdered brother—these passed utterly from
their souls in the strong kiss which united them for all days.




                                   5




Yet not for ever was the memory of his dead life to vanish from the
heart of Ivan. Even during the times of his most passionate love for
Mary there began to invade him moments of bitter memory and regret.
There was something which prevented the entire fusion with Mary towards
which he yearned and ached. It was something deep in his soul. It was
something which gnawed at his forearm, bit with teeth of contrition at
the place where the axe had fallen and severed the hand from the wrist.

He tried to put all this futility from him. He would seize Mary more
closely, look desperately into her eyes, and in the perfume of her lips
and hair seek anodyne. Between them there was a sufficient store of
money, small though it was, to allow them a few months of liberty,
undisturbed by any thought of the future. They wandered lazily about
Greece for a little time, finding in the Greek day and the immemorial
hills a perfect setting for their love.

And yet ever more insistently came to him the call of the hand—the hand
which had been his own and not his own, the hand which had united in so
unique an embrace his brother with himself.

Again at night voices tormented him. Again, when winds were about, they
called with living words: “The hand! The hand! It is calling you,
calling! Answer! He wants you! Peter!” wailed the wind. “Peter! Peter!”

Lines began to draw across his forehead. With anxiety Mary saw shadows
growing under his eyes, and in his eyes a hunger which grew more and
more forlorn. “What is it, love?” she would murmur. “You’ve not slept
well!”

“Nothing at all, love, nothing! All’s well!” he would reply, trying with
a kiss to forget the wind and the hand and the call.

“There’s something you’re longing for. Tell me, Ivan. Let me help you.
You must.”

“Nothing, Mary. I’ve got you. There’s nothing else in the world.” But
the call of the hand did not abate. “Peter!” the winds wailed, “Peter!
He wants you! Answer!”

The urgency of the call grew more imperious. He was sickening and
growing weak. There was a hot torpidity in the dry Greek noon which
shrivelled his veins. He would drag his coat down from his neck and lift
his head and try to breathe the deep breath he had known in his Serbian
wood. But there was no spaciousness, no great draughts of cool air in
the wind, only voices: “Peter! Peter! Peter!”

“We must go somewhere. We must go away,” said Mary. “We must go to
Athens and see a doctor, Ivan. I’m afraid!”

“Not Athens! No!” he replied with a shudder, his temples contracting as
before the hot blast from an oven. Those dry marble spaces! The dusty
pepper-trees! The sweating crowds in the shops, swallowing sweet cakes
like swine swallowing husks in a sty! Athens became a nightmare.

He was lying awake one night, the body of Mary curled beside him, her
hair floating vaguely on the pillow in the half-light of the moon. She
stirred in her sleep, and her little white hand unconsciously sought his
wrist and fastened tightly round it. That moment bridged the buried
time. Unescapably Mary had brought back to him the sensation of Peter
lying in the grasp of his own hand. Never before was the call of the
hand so imperious. Never so clearly did the wind exclaim, “Peter! He
wants you! Answer!”

An irresistible love for his murdered brother overwhelmed him. He raised
himself from his bed and lifted helplessly his lopped arm into the
whispering room. “Coming, my brother, I am coming! Wait! Peter!” he
moaned, and the wind replied: “Peter! Peter!”

He lay back in bed. He realised that the strongest claim in the world
upon him was the call of the hand. As for Mary—she was nothing different
from himself. For her as for him the call of the hand came
dictatorially. In each other they were one, but without the hand their
unity was uncompleted. The call of the hand must be obeyed. To-morrow
they must leave Greece behind. To-morrow to Serbia, to-morrow the
response to the hand.

Mary was not surprised when Ivan without warning explained that all
their plans were altered. She was used to his unaccountable whims, the
sudden mystic impulses of his Slavonic soul.

They packed up the few things which were all the impediment they
possessed, and next day saw them well started on their way to Monastir,
carefully skirting Athens. Arrived at Monastir, a few days elapsed
before they appeared at the remote wood where Ivan was born. The cottage
built by Ivan Kupreloff was not yet occupied. The strange character of
its former inhabitants combined with the terrible nature of Peter’s
death had succeeded in keeping it empty! They obtained permission from
its owner to occupy the cottage, and with a great sigh of content Ivan
flung open the door where he and his brother had passed so frequently in
former days.

In a little time Mary had made of the house such a palace of delight as
it had not been since Ivan’s mother was dead. Happily, Ivan took in
large draughts of the Serbian pineland air, filling his lungs. Happily,
with Mary beside him on the bed where he and Peter had lain entwined,
the dark drowsy nights melted into dawn. He made his reply to the call
of the hand. Only faintly, if at all, the wind or the branches whispered
“Peter! Peter!” Peter seemed to be happy at last. The severed hand
seemed at last to be tranquil round the wrist of the murdered brother.
Then the winds died away, and there was no sound of “Peter!”; only
fitfully a swaying of twigs and a rustle of pine-needles.

So it seemed. Till summer drooped her drowsing hair. Summer became
wrinkled and old. Summer went and the swift autumn came. The days
shortened into the rigours of winter, the days ever contracted towards
the anniversary of that red day when the axe was lifted and Peter fell.
Never a moment did it occur to Ivan that now when the fatal day was
approaching he might leave behind him his Serbian wood. He knew that,
more tightly than ever during his living days, the wrist of Peter lay
within his own hand, tight, unescapable. Mary and he lay under the thumb
of that severed hand wherefrom the red arrow glowed when the night was
dark and the woodfire threw leaping shadows over the log-walls. There
was no gainsaying the call of the hand till the end of days. Ivan knew
that never again would he leave behind his Serbian wood.

Came the night which was the anniversary of that dead, unburyable night
when Peter’s doom had been sealed. Again there was the rumbling of
thunder, there were evil flashes of lightning that ran among the clouds.
Never with so firm an embrace had Mary been clasped within his arms.
Nothing in the world was so strong as his love for Mary. They had
responded to the call of the hand. There was no further claim upon them.
Ivan kissed her sleeping eyes and was lulled in the music of her
breathing. A drowsiness came over him, and for a time he slid into
sleep.

In his sleep something tightened round him, something growing so tight
that it forced through the barriers of his sleep. Vaguely, faintly a
half-consciousness came back to him. He was not awake. He was not
asleep. He was in a borderland where the other world is not dead and
this world is half-alive. Tighter grew the thing which pressed against
his sleep. It was round his wrist, it was round the wrist where
something had once come crashing down. What was it? What was it had come
crashing down? An axe it was that had come crashing down. It was the
hand of Mary growing tighter round his wrist. No, it could not be the
hand of Mary. Mary had fallen from his arms. Mary was turned away from
him. He could see her hands pale where she had lifted them in sleep
above her head. It was not the hand of Mary growing tighter round his
wrist. But it was a hand. No doubt of that. It was a hand. With a dull
glow of flame a little red arrow gleamed like embers below the thumb of
the hand. Where had he seen that arrow? Where and when? When his hand
had fallen away from him, lopped at the wrist. It was the dead hand
which was not dead. It was his own hand. It was the hand with the red
arrow which had held Peter so tightly. It was the dead hand which was
alive, the living hand which had arisen from the dead. Tighter round his
wrist grew the pressure of the severed hand. The hand was tired of
calling. The hand had come. There was no gainsaying the hand. So tight
grew the clutch of the hand that his whole arm slowly lifted from his
side. Irresistibly the shoulder followed the rising arm. There was no
gainsaying the hand. Neither awake nor asleep, neither living nor dead,
he followed the hand, he rose from the bed where Mary lay, sleeping
sundered from him, his no more. Mary was alive. He was neither living
nor dead. The door of the room was opened wide. Closed doors were no
barrier against the hand which had arisen from the grave. Slowly, with
steady feet, with wide, filmy eyes, Ivan passed through the door. Slowly
through the outer door, slowly into the sound of thunder, into the gleam
of lightning and the voices of winds moaning unceasingly, “Peter! Peter!
He is calling you! Ivan! Peter is calling you! Follow!” and ever again
unceasingly, “Peter! Peter!”

Tighter than the bonds of ice or granite hills, tight only as the bond
of death, the arisen hand held the lopped wrist, drew the slow body of
Ivan through the haunted night far into the wood, far through the
talking trees, far to the place of that tree which had not been cut
down, to the place where an axe had fallen through bones and flesh,
where Peter had fallen, where Peter lay buried, not deep down; where
Peter lay buried under twigs and loose earth.

Tightly round the wrist of the man neither alive nor dead clutched the
resurrected hand. Nearer and nearer to the shallow grave the hand pulled
down the body of Ivan. Methodically, steadily, working with no pause,
the free hand of Ivan moved the twigs and the loose earth—methodically,
with no pause, until at last the body of Peter lay revealed; not
recognisable, dissolute beneath the change through which all men shall
pass, recognisable only to those filmy eyes of Ivan, to that questing
hungry soul of Ivan which had come to claim its own. Closer and closer
to the dead brother the severed hand drew the body of Ivan down; so
close, so close, until at last the hand clutched again and for ever that
wrist to which Fate had fastened it long years ago. Alongside of his
dead brother, quietly, with those eyes which neither saw nor did not
see, Ivan lay down full length. Gradually the severed hand, the hand
which had arisen from the dead to claim him, because the dead brother
called and the severed hand called for its own, gradually the hand
slipped from the lopped wrist; the wrist and the arm became one. The
hand of Ivan had brought Ivan to his own. Indissolubly, Peter and Ivan
lay joined together. But the death which lay cold in the heart and body
of Peter passed from the clutched wrist, passed into the hand which
clutched it, passed along the arm which had been severed once, and along
Ivan’s shoulder, until it made his eyes unseeing discs and of his heart
cold stone which could beat no more.

As the grey light of dawn came emptily down the Serbian woods, the two
brothers lay immortally one again, like the two babies the gods had
given Nikolai Kupreloff upon a long-vanished night.




End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Twenty-Three Stories by Twenty and
Three Authors, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TWENTY-THREE STORIES, TWENTY-THREE AUTHORS ***

***** This file should be named 62347-0.txt or 62347-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/6/2/3/4/62347/

Produced by Roger Frank and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
