The Project Gutenberg EBook of Twenty-Three Stories by Twenty and Three
Authors, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Twenty-Three Stories by Twenty and Three Authors

Author: Various

Editor: Ernest Rhys
        Catherine Amy Dawson-Scott

Release Date: June 8, 2020 [EBook #62347]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TWENTY-THREE STORIES, TWENTY-THREE AUTHORS ***



HATTERAS

By A. W. MASON


The story was told to me by James Walker in the cabin of a seven-ton
cutter, one night when we lay anchored in Helford River. It was towards
the end of September; during this last week the air had grown chilly
with the dusk, and the sea when it lost the sun took on a leaden and a
dreary look. There was no other boat on the wooded creek and the swish
of the tide against the planks had a very lonesome sound. All these
circumstances I think provoked Walker to tell the story, but most of all
the lonely swish of the tide against the planks. For it is the story of
a man’s loneliness and the strange ways into which loneliness misled his
soul. However, let the story speak for itself.

Hatteras and Walker had been schoolfellows, though never classmates.
Hatteras indeed was the head of the school and prophecy vaguely sketched
out for him a brilliant career in some service of importance. The
definite law, however, that the sins of the fathers shall be visited
upon the children overbore this prophecy. Hatteras, the father,
disorganized his son’s future by dropping unexpectedly through one of
the trapways of speculation into the Bankruptcy Court beneath, just two
months before Hatteras, the son, was to have gone up to Oxford. The lad
was therefore compelled to start life in a stony world with a
stock-in-trade which consisted of a schoolboy’s command of the classics,
a real inborn gift of tongues and the friendship of James Walker.

The last item proved of the most immediate value. For Walker, whose
father was the junior partner in a firm of West African merchants,
obtained for Hatteras an employment as the bookkeeper at a branch
factory in the Bight of Benin.

Thus the friends parted. Hatteras went out to West Africa alone, and met
with a strange welcome on the day when he landed. The incident did not
come to Walker’s ears until some time afterwards, nor when he heard of
it did he at once appreciate the effect which it had upon Hatteras. But
chronologically it comes into the story at this point, and so may as
well be immediately told.

There was no settlement very near to the factory. It stood by itself on
the swamps of the Forcados River with the mangrove forest closing in
about it. Accordingly the captain of the steamer just put Hatteras
ashore in a boat and left him with his traps on the beach. Half-a-dozen
Kru boys had come down from the factory to receive him, but they could
speak no English, and Hatteras at this time could speak no Kru. So that
although there was no lack of conversation there was not much
interchange of thought. At last Hatteras pointed to his traps. The Kru
boys picked them up and preceded Hatteras to the factory. They mounted
the steps to the verandah on the first floor and laid their loads down.
Then they proceeded to further conversation. Hatteras gathered from
their excited faces and gestures that they wished to impart information,
but he could make neither head nor tail of a word they said, and at last
he retired from the din of their chatter through the windows of a room
which gave on to the verandah, and sat down to wait for his superior,
the agent.

It was early in the morning when Hatteras landed and he waited until
midday patiently. In the afternoon it occurred to him that the agent
would have shown a kindly consideration if he had left a written message
or an intelligible Kru boy to receive him. It is true that the blacks
came in at intervals and chattered and gesticulated, but matters were
not thereby appreciably improved. He did not like to go poking about the
house, so he contemplated the mud banks and the mud river and the
mangrove forest, and cursed the agent. The country was very quiet. There
are few things quieter than a West African forest in the daytime. It is
obtrusively, emphatically quiet. It does not let you forget how
singularly quiet it is. And towards sundown the quietude began to jar on
Hatteras’ nerves. He was besides very hungry. To while away the time he
took a stroll round the verandah.

He walked along the side of the houses towards the back, and as he
neared the back he heard a humming sound. The further he went the louder
it grew. It was something like the hum of a mill, only not so metallic
and not so loud; and it came from the rear of the house.

Hatteras turned the corner and what he saw was this—a shuttered window
and a cloud of flies. The flies were not aimlessly swarming outside the
window; they streamed in through the lattice of the shutters in a busy,
practical way; they came in columns from the forest and converged upon
the shutters; and the hum sounded from within the room.

Hatteras looked about for a Kru boy for the sake of company, but at that
moment there was not one to be seen.

He felt the cold strike at his spine. He went back into the room in
which he had been sitting. He sat again but he sat shivering. The agent
had left no word for him.... The Kru boys had been anxious to
explain—something. The humming of the flies about that shuttered window
seemed to Hatteras a more explicit language than the Kru boys’
chatterings. He penetrated into the interior of the house, and reckoned
up the doors. He opened one of them ever so slightly and the buzzing
came through like the hum of a wheel in a factory revolving in the
collar of a strap. He flung the door open and stood upon the threshold.
The atmosphere of the room appalled him; he felt the sweat break cold
upon his forehead and a deadly sickness in all his body. Then he nerved
himself to enter.

At first he saw little because of the gloom. In a while, however, he
made out a bed stretched along the wall and a thing stretched upon the
bed. The thing was more or less shapeless because it was covered with a
black furry sort of rug. Hatteras, however, had little trouble in
defining it. He knew now for certain what it was that the Kru boys had
been so anxious to explain to him. He approached the bed and bent over
it, and as he bent over it the horrible thing occurred which left so
vivid an impression on Hatteras. The black furry rug suddenly lifted
itself from the bed, beat about Hatteras’ face, and dissolved into
flies. The Kru boys found Hatteras in a dead swoon on the floor
half-an-hour later, and next day, of course, he was down with the fever.
The agent had died of it three days before.

Hatteras recovered from the fever, but not from the impression. It left
him with a prevailing sense of horror and, at first, with a sense of
disgust too.

“It’s an obscene country,” he would say. But he stayed in it, for he had
no choice. All the money which he could save went to the support of his
family, and for six years the firm he served moved him from district to
district, from factory to factory.

Now the second item of his stock-in-trade was a gift of tongues, and
about this time it began to bring him profit. Wherever Hatteras was
posted, he managed to pick up a native dialect, and with the dialect
inevitably a knowledge of native customs. Dialects are numerous on the
west coast, and at the end of six years Hatteras could speak as many of
them as some traders could enumerate. Languages ran in his blood; he
acquired a reputation for knowledge and was offered service under the
Niger Protectorate, so that when, two years later, Walker came out to
Africa to open a new branch factory at a settlement on the Bonny River,
he found Hatteras stationed in command there.

Hatteras, in fact, went down to Bonny River town to meet the steamer
which brought his friend.

“I say, Dick, you look bad,” said Walker.

“People are not, as a rule, offensively robust about these parts.”

“I know that; but you’re the weariest bag of bones I’ve ever seen.”

“Well, look at yourself in a glass a year from now for my double,” said
Hatteras, and the pair went up river together.

“Your factory is next to the Residency,” said Hatteras. “There’s a
compound to each running down to the river, and there’s a palisade
between the compounds. I’ve cut a little gate in the palisade as it will
shorten the way from one house to the other.”

The wicket gate was frequently used during the next few months—indeed
more frequently than Walker imagined. He was only aware that, when they
were both at home, Hatteras would come through it of an evening and
smoke on his verandah. There he would sit for hours cursing the country,
raving about the lights of Piccadilly Circus, and offering his immortal
soul in exchange for a comic opera tune played upon a barrel-organ.
Walker possessed a big atlas, and one of Hatteras’ chief diversions was
to trace with his finger a bee-line across the African continent and the
Bay of Biscay until he reached London.

More rarely Walker would stroll over to the Residency, but he soon came
to notice that Hatteras had a distinct preference for the factory and
for the factory verandah. The reason for the preference puzzled Walker
considerably. He drew a quite erroneous conclusion that Hatteras was
hiding at the Residency—well, someone whom it was prudent, especially in
an official, to conceal. He abandoned the conclusion, however, when he
discovered that his friend was in the habit of making solitary
expeditions. At times Hatteras would be absent for a couple of days, at
times for a week, and, so far as Walker could ascertain, he never so
much as took a servant with him to keep him company. He would simply
announce at night his intended departure, and in the morning he would be
gone. Nor on his return did he ever offer to Walker any explanation of
his journeys. On one occasion, however, Walker broached the subject.
Hatteras had come back the night before, and he sat crouched up in a
deck chair, looking intently into the darkness of the forest.

“I say,” asked Walker, “isn’t it rather dangerous to go slumming about
West Africa alone?”

Hatteras did not reply for a moment. He seemed not to have heard the
suggestion, and when he did speak it was to ask a quite irrelevant
question.

“Have you ever seen the Horse Guards’ Parade on a dark rainy night?” he
asked; but he never moved his head, he never took his eyes from the
forest. “The wet level of ground looks just like a lagoon and the arches
a Venice palace above it.”

“But look here, Dick!” said Walker, keeping to his subject, “you never
leave word when you are coming back. One never knows that you have come
back until you show yourself the morning after.”

“I think,” said Hatteras slowly, “that the finest sight in the world is
to be seen from the bridge in St. James’ Park when there’s a State Ball
on at Buckingham Palace and the light from the windows reddens the lake
and the carriages glance about the Mall like fireflies.”

“Even your servants don’t know when you come back,” said Walker.

“Oh,” said Hatteras quietly, “so you have been asking questions of my
servants?”

“I had a good reason,” replied Walker. “Your safety”; and with that the
conversation dropped.

Walker watched Hatteras. Hatteras watched the forest. A West African
mangrove forest night is full of the eeriest, queerest sounds that ever
a man’s ears hearkened to. And the sounds come not so much from the
birds or the soughing of branches; they seem to come from the swamp-life
underneath the branches, at the roots of the trees. There’s a ceaseless
stir as of a myriad reptiles creeping in the slime. Listen long enough
and you will fancy that you hear the whirr and rush of innumerable
crabs, the flapping of innumerable fish. Now and again a more
distinctive sound emerges from the rest—the croaking of a bull-frog, the
whining cough of a crocodile. At such sounds Hatteras would start up in
his chair and cock his head like a dog in a room that hears another dog
barking in the street.

“Doesn’t it sound damned wicked?” he said with a queer smile of
enjoyment.

Walker did not answer. The light from a lamp in the room behind them
struck obliquely upon Hatteras’ face and slanted off from it in a
narrowing column until it vanished in a yellow thread among the leaves
of the trees. It showed that the same enjoyment which rang in Hatteras’
voice was alive upon his face. His eyes, his ears, were alert, and he
gently opened and shut his mouth with a little clicking of the teeth. In
some horrible way he seemed to have something in common with, he
appeared almost to participate in, the activity of the swamp. Thus had
Walker often seen him sit, but never with the light so clear upon his
face, and the sight gave to him a quite new impression of his friend. He
wondered whether all these months his judgment had been wrong. And out
of that wonder a new thought sprang into his mind.

“Dick,” he said, “this house of mine stands between your house and the
forest. It stands on the borders of the trees, on the edge of the swamp.
Is that why you prefer it to your own?”

Hatteras turned his head quickly towards his companion, almost
suspiciously. Then he looked back into the darkness, and after a little
said:

“It’s not only the things you care about, old man, which tug at you;
it’s the things you hate as well. I hate this country. I hate these
miles and miles of mangroves, and yet I am fascinated. I can’t get the
forests and the undergrowth and the swamp out of my mind. I dream of
them at night. I dream that I am sinking into that black oily batter of
mud. Listen,” and he suddenly broke off with his head stretched forward.
“Doesn’t it sound wicked?”

“But all this talk about London?” cried Walker.

“Oh, don’t you understand?” interrupted Hatteras roughly. Then he
changed his tone and gave his reason quietly. “One has to struggle
against a fascination of that sort. It’s devil’s work. So for all I am
worth I talk about London.”

“Look here, Dick,” said Walker. “You had better get leave and go back to
the old country for a spell.”

“A very solid piece of advice,” said Hatteras, and he went home to the
Residency.

The next morning he had again disappeared. But Walker discovered upon
his table a couple of new volumes, and glanced at the titles. They were
Burton’s account of his pilgrimage to El Medinah and Mecca.

Five nights afterwards Walker was smoking a pipe on the verandah when he
fancied that he heard a rubbing, scuffling sound as if someone very
cautiously was climbing over the fence of his compound. The moon was low
in the sky and dipping down toward the forest, indeed the rim of it
touched the treetops so that while a full half of the enclosure was lit
by the yellow light, that half which bordered on the forest was inky
black in shadow, and it was from the furthest corner of this second half
that the sound came. Walker leaned forward listening. He heard the sound
again, and a moment after a second sound, which left him in no doubt.
For in that dark corner he knew that a number of palisades for repairing
the fence were piled, and the second sound which he heard was a rattle
as someone stumbled against them. Walker went inside and fetched a
rifle.

When he came back he saw a negro creeping across the bright open space
towards the Residency. Walker hailed to him to stop. Instead the negro
ran. He ran towards the wicket gate in the palisade. Walker shouted
again; the figure only ran the faster. He had covered half the distance
before Walker fired. He clutched his right forearm with his left hand,
but he did not stop. Walker fired again, this time at his legs, and the
man dropped to the ground. Walker heard his servants stirring as he ran
down the steps. He crossed quickly to the negro and the negro spoke to
him, but in English, and with the voice of Hatteras.

“For God’s sake keep your servants off!”

Walker ran to the house, met his servants at the foot of the steps and
ordered them back. He had shot at a monkey he said. Then he returned to
Hatteras.

“Dicky, are you hurt?” he whispered.

“You hit me each time you fired, but not very badly, I think.”

He bandaged Hatteras’ arm and thigh with strips of his shirt, and waited
by his side until the house was quiet. Then he lifted him and carried
him across the enclosure to the steps, and up the steps into his
bedroom. It was a long and fatiguing process. For one thing Walker dared
make no noise and must needs tread lightly with his load; for another,
the steps were steep and rickety, with a narrow balustrade on each side
waist-high. It seemed to Walker that the day would dawn before he
reached the top. Once or twice Hatteras stirred in his arms, and he
feared the man would die then and there. For all the time his blood
dripped and pattered like heavy raindrops on the wooden steps.

Walker laid Hatteras on his bed and examined his wounds. One bullet had
passed through the fleshy part of the forearm, the other through the
fleshy part of his right thigh. But no bones were broken and no arteries
cut. Walker lit a fire, baked some plantain leaves, and applied them as
a poultice. Then he went out with a pail of water and scrubbed down the
steps. Again he dared not make any noise; and it was close on daybreak
before he had done. His night’s work, however, was not ended. He had
still to cleanse the black stain from Hatteras’ skin, and the sun was up
before he stretched a rug upon the ground and went to sleep with his
back against the door.

“Walker,” Hatteras called out in a loud voice, an hour or so later.

Walker woke up and crossed over to the bed.

“Dicky, I’m frightfully sorry. I couldn’t know it was you.”

“That’s all right, Jim. Don’t you worry about that. What I wanted to say
was that nobody had better know. It wouldn’t do, would it, if it got
about?”

“Oh, I am not so sure. People would think it a rather creditable
proceeding.”

Hatteras shot a puzzled look at his friend. Walker, however, did not
notice it, and continued, “I saw Burton’s account of his pilgrimage in
your room; I might have known that journeys of the kind were just the
sort of thing to appeal to you.”

“Oh, yes, that’s it,” said Hatteras, lifting himself up in bed. He spoke
eagerly—perhaps a thought too eagerly. “Yes, that’s it. I have always
been keen on understanding the natives thoroughly. It’s after all no
less than one’s duty if one has to rule them, and since I could speak
their lingo—” he broke off and returned to the subject which had
prompted him to rouse Walker. “But, all the same, it wouldn’t do if the
natives got to know.”

“There’s no difficulty about that,” said Walker. “I’ll give out that you
have come back with the fever and that I am nursing you. Fortunately
there’s no doctor handy to come making inconvenient examinations.”

Hatteras knew something of surgery, and under his directions Walker
poulticed and bandaged him until he recovered. The bandaging, however,
was amateurish, and, as a result, the muscles contracted in Hatteras’
thigh and he limped—ever so slightly, still he limped—he limped to his
dying day. He did not, however, on that account abandon his
explorations, and more than once Walker, when his lights were out and he
was smoking a pipe on the verandah, would see a black figure with a
trailing walk cross his compound and pass stealthily through the wicket
in the fence. Walker took occasion to expostulate with his friend.

“It’s too dangerous a game for a man to play for any length of time. It
is doubly dangerous now that you limp. You ought to give it up.”

Hatteras made a strange reply.

“I’ll try to,” he said.

Walker pondered over the words for some time. He set them side by side
in his thoughts with that confession which Hatteras had made to him one
evening. He asked himself whether, after all, Hatteras’ explanation of
his conduct was sincere, whether it was really a desire to know the
native thoroughly which prompted those mysterious expeditions, and then
he remembered that he himself had first suggested the explanation to
Hatteras. Walker began to feel uneasy—more than uneasy, actually afraid
on his friend’s account. Hatteras had acknowledged that the country
fascinated him, and fascinated him through its hideous side. Was this
masquerading as a black man a further proof of the fascination? Was it,
as it were, a step downwards towards a closer association? Walker sought
to laugh the notion from his mind, but it returned and returned, and
here and there an incident occurred to give it strength and colour.

For instance, on one occasion after Hatteras had been three weeks
absent, Walker sauntered over to the Residency towards four o’clock in
the afternoon. Hatteras was trying cases in the Court-house, which
formed the ground floor of the Residency. Walker stepped into the room.
It was packed with a naked throng of blacks, and the heat was
overpowering. At the end of the hall sat Hatteras. His worn face shone
out amongst the black heads about him white and waxy like a gardenia.

Walker, however, thinking that the Court would rise, determined to wait
for a little. But, at the last moment, a negro was put up to answer to a
charge of participation in fetish rites. The case seemed sufficiently
clear from the outset, but somehow Hatteras delayed its conclusion.
There was evidence and unrebutted evidence of the usual details—human
sacrifice, mutilations, and the like, but Hatteras pressed for more. He
sat until it was dusk, and then had candles brought into the
Court-house. He seemed indeed not so much to be investigating the
negro’s guilt as to be adding to his own knowledge of fetish
ceremonials. And Walker could not but perceive that he took more than a
merely scientific pleasure in the increase of his knowledge. His face
appeared to smooth out, his eyes became quick, interested, almost
excited; and Walker again had the queer impression that Hatteras was in
spirit participating in the loathsome ceremonies, and participating with
an intense enjoyment. In the end the negro was convicted and the Court
rose. But he might have been convicted a good three hours before. Walker
went home shaking his head. He seemed to be watching a man deliberately
divesting himself of his humanity. It seemed as though the white man was
ambitious to decline into the black. Hatteras was growing into an
uncanny creature. His friend began to foresee a time when he should hold
him in loathing and horror. And the next morning helped to confirm him
in that forecast.

For Walker had to make an early start down river for Bonny town, and as
he stood on the landing-stage Hatteras came down to him from the
Residency.

“You heard that negro tried yesterday?” he asked with an assumption of
carelessness.

“Yes, and condemned. What of him?”

“He escaped last night. It’s a bad business, isn’t it?”

Walker nodded in reply and his boat pushed off. But it stuck in his mind
for the greater part of that day that the prison adjoined the
Court-house and so formed part of the ground floor of the Residency. Had
Hatteras connived at his escape? Had the judge secretly set free the
prisoner whom he had publicly condemned?

The question troubled Walker considerably during his month of absence,
and stood in the way of his business. He learned for the first time how
much he loved his friend, and how eagerly he watched for that friend’s
advancement. Each day added to his load of anxiety. He dreamed
continually of a black-painted man slipping among the tree-boles nearer
and nearer, towards the red glare of a fire in some open space secure
amongst the swamps, where hideous mysteries had their celebration. He
cut short his business and hurried back from Bonny. He crossed at once
to the Residency and found his friend in a great turmoil of affairs.

“Jim,” said Hatteras, starting up, “I’ve got a year’s leave; I’m going
home.”

“Dicky!” cried Walker, and he nearly wrung Hatteras’ hand from his arm.
“That’s grand news.”

“Yes, old man, I thought you would be glad; I sail in a fortnight.” And
he did.

For the first month Walker was glad. A year’s leave would make a new man
of Dick Hatteras, he thought, or at all events restore the old man, sane
and sound, as he had been before he came to the West African coast.
During the second month Walker began to feel lonely. In the third he
bought a banjo and learnt it during the fourth and fifth. During the
sixth he began to say to himself, “What a time poor Dick must have had
all those years with these cursed forests about him. I don’t wonder—I
don’t wonder.” He turned disconsolately to his banjo and played for the
rest of the year—all through the wet season while the rain came down in
a steady roar and only the curlews cried—until Hatteras returned. He
returned at the top of his spirits and health. Of course he was
hall-marked West African, but no man gets rid of that stamp. Moreover
there was more than health in his expression. There was a new look of
pride in his eyes, and when he spoke of a bachelor it was in terms of
sympathetic pity.

“Jim,” said he, after five minutes of restraint, “I am engaged to be
married.”

Jim danced round him in delight. “What an ass I have been,” he thought;
“why didn’t I think of that cure myself?” And he asked, “When is it to
be?”

“In eight months. You’ll come home and see me through.”

Walker agreed and for eight months listened to praises of the lady.
There were no more solitary expeditions. In fact, Hatteras seemed
absorbed in the diurnal discovery of new perfections in his future wife.

“Yes, she seems a nice girl,” Walker commented. He found her upon his
arrival in England more human than Hatteras’ conversation had led him to
expect, and she proved to him that she was a nice girl. For she listened
for hours to his lectures on the proper way to treat Dick without the
slightest irritation and with only a faintly visible amusement. Besides
she insisted on returning with her husband to Bonny River, which was a
sufficiently courageous thing to undertake.

For a year in spite of the climate the couple were commonplace and
happy. For a year Walker clucked about them like a hen after its
chickens, and slept the sleep of the untroubled. Then he returned to
England and from that time made only occasional journeys to West Africa.
Thus for a while he almost lost sight of Hatteras, and consequently
still slept the sleep of the untroubled. One morning, however, he
arrived unexpectedly at the settlement and at once called on Hatteras.
He did not wait to be announced, but ran up the steps outside the house
and into the dining-room. He found Mrs. Hatteras crying. She dried her
eyes, welcomed Walker, and said that she was sorry, but her husband was
away.

Walker started, looked at her eyes, and asked hesitatingly whether he
could help. Mrs. Hatteras replied with an ill-assumed surprise that she
did not understand. Walker suggested that there was trouble. Mrs.
Hatteras denied the truth of the suggestion. Walker pressed the point
and Mrs. Hatteras yielded so far as to assert that there was no trouble
in which Hatteras was concerned. Walker hardly thought it the occasion
for a parade of manners, and insisted on pointing out that his knowledge
of her husband was intimate and dated from his schooldays. Therefore
Mrs. Hatteras gave way.

“Dick goes away alone,” she said. “He stains his skin and goes away at
night. He tells me that he must, that it’s the only way by which he can
know the natives, and that so it’s a sort of duty. He says the black
tells nothing of himself to the white man—never. You must go amongst
them if you are to know them. So he goes, and I never know when he will
come back. I never know whether he will come back.”

“But he has done that sort of thing on and off for years, and he has
always come back,” replied Walker.

“Yes, but one day he will not.”

Walker comforted her as well as he could, praised Hatteras for his
conduct, though his heart was hot against him, spoke of risks that every
man must run who serves the Empire. “Never a lotus closes, you know,” he
quoted, and went back to the factory with the consciousness that he had
been telling lies.

It was a sense of duty that prompted Hatteras, of that Walker assured
himself he was certain, and he waited—he waited from darkness to
daybreak in his compound, for three successive nights.

On the fourth he heard the scuffling sound at the corner of the fence.
The night was black as the inside of a coffin. Half a regiment of men
might have passed him and he not have seen them. Accordingly he walked
cautiously to the palisade which separated the enclosure of the
Residency from his own, felt along it until he reached the little gate
and stationed himself in front of it. In a few moments he thought that
he heard a man breathing, but whether to the right or the left he could
not tell; and then a groping hand lightly touched his face and drew away
again. Walker said nothing, but held his breath and did not move. The
hand was stretched out again. This time it touched his breast and moved
across it until it felt a button of Walker’s coat. Then it was snatched
away, and Walker heard a gasping indraw of the breath and afterwards a
sound as of a man turning in a flurry. Walker sprang forward and caught
a naked shoulder with one hand, a naked arm with the other.

“Wait a bit, Dick Hatteras,” he said.

There was a low cry, and then a husky voice addressed him respectfully
as “Daddy” in trade-English.

“That won’t do, Dick,” said Walker.

The voice babbled more trade-English.

“If you’re not Dick Hatteras,” continued Walker, tightening his grasp,
“you’ve no manner of right here. I’ll give you till I count ten, and
then I shall shoot.”

Walker counted up to nine aloud and then——

“Jim,” said Hatteras in his natural voice.

“That’s better,” said Walker. “Let’s go in and talk.”

He went up the steps and lighted the lamp. Hatteras followed him and the
two men faced one another. For a little while neither of them spoke.
Walker was repeating to himself that this man with the black skin, naked
except for a dirty loincloth and a few feathers on his head, was a white
man married to a white wife who was sleeping—nay, more likely crying—not
thirty yards away.

Hatteras began to mumble out his usual explanation of duty and the rest
of it.

“That won’t wash,” interrupted Walker. “What is it? A woman?”

“Good Heaven, no!” cried Hatteras suddenly. It was plain that that
explanation was at all events untrue. “Jim, I’ve a good mind to tell you
all about it.”

“You have got to,” said Walker. He stood between Hatteras and the steps.

“I told you how this country fascinated me in spite of myself,” he
began.

“But I thought,” interrupted Walker, “that you had got over that
since—why, man, you are married,” and he came across to Hatteras and
shook him by the shoulder. “Don’t you understand? You have a wife!”

“I know,” said Hatteras. “But there are things deeper at the heart of me
than the love of woman, and one of these things is the love of horror. I
tell you, it bites as nothing else does in the world. It’s like
absinthe, that turns you sick at the beginning and that you can’t do
without once you have got the taste of it. Do you remember my first
landing? It made me sick enough at the beginning, you know. But now——”
He sat down in a chair and drew it close to Walker. His voice dropped to
a passionate whisper, he locked and unlocked his fingers with feverish
movements, and his eyes shifted and glittered in an unnatural
excitement.

“It’s like going down to hell and coming up again and wanting to go down
again. Oh, you’d want to go down again. You’d find the whole earth pale.
You’d count the days until you went down again. Do you remember Orpheus?
I think he looked back, not to see if Eurydice was coming after him, but
because he knew it was the last glimpse he would get of hell.” At that
he broke off and began to chant in a crazy voice, wagging his head and
swaying his body to the rhythm of the lines—

    Quum subita incautum dementia cepit amantem
    Ignoscenda quidem scirent si ignoscere manes;
    Restitit Eurydicenque suam jam luce sub ipsa
    Immemor heu! victusque animi respexit.

“Oh, stop that!” cried Walker, and Hatteras laughed. “For God’s sake,
stop it!”

For the words brought back to him in a flash the vision of a classroom
with its chipped desks ranged against the varnished walls, the droning
sound of the form-master’s voice, and the swish of lilac bushes against
the lower window panes on summer afternoons. Then he said, “Oh, go on,
and let’s have done with it.”

Hatteras took up his tale again, and it seemed to Walker that the man
breathed the very miasma of the swamp and infected the room with it. He
spoke of leopard societies, murder clubs, human sacrifices. He had
witnessed them at the beginning, he had taken his share in them at the
last. He told the whole story without shame, with indeed a glowing
enjoyment. He spared Walker no details. He related them in their
loathsome completeness until Walker felt stunned and sick. “Stop,” he
said again, “stop! That’s enough.”

Hatteras, however, continued. He appeared to have forgotten Walker’s
presence. He told the story to himself, for his own amusement, as a
child will, and here and there he laughed, and the mere sound of his
laughter was inhuman. He only came to a stop when he saw Walker hold out
to him a cocked and loaded revolver.

“Well?” he asked. “Well?”

Walker still offered him the revolver.

“There are cases, I think, which neither God’s law nor man’s law seems
to have provided for. There’s your wife, you see, to be considered. If
you don’t take it I shall shoot you myself now, here, and mark you I
shall shoot you for the sake of a boy I loved at school in the old
country.”

Hatteras took the revolver in silence, laid it on the table, fingered it
for a little.

“My wife must never know,” he said.

“There’s the pistol. Outside’s the swamp. The swamp will tell no tales,
nor shall I. Your wife need never know.”

Hatteras picked up the pistol and stood up.

“Good-bye, Jim,” he said, and half pushed out his hand. Walker shook his
head, and Hatteras went out on the verandah and down the steps.

Walker heard him climb over the fence and then followed as far as the
verandah. In the still night the rustle and swish of the undergrowth
came quite clearly to his ears. The sound ceased, and a few minutes
afterwards the muffled crack of a pistol-shot broke the silence like the
tap of a hammer. The swamp, as Walker prophesied, told no tales. Mrs.
Hatteras gave the one explanation of her husband’s disappearance that
she knew, and returned broken-hearted to England. There was some loud
talk about the self-sacrificing energy which makes the English a
dominant race, and there you might think is the end of the story.

But some years later Walker went trudging up the Ogowe River in Congo
Français. He travelled as far as Woermann’s factory in Njob Island, and,
having transacted his business there, pushed up stream in the hope of
opening the upper reaches for trade purposes. He travelled for a hundred
and fifty miles in a little sternwheel steamer. At that point he
stretched an awning over a whale-boat, embarked himself, his banjo and
eight blacks from the steamer, and rowed for another fifty miles. There
he ran the boat’s nose into a clay cliff close to a Fan village, and
went ashore to negotiate with the chief.

There was a slip of forest between the village and the river banks, and
while Walker was still dodging the palm creepers which tapestried it he
heard a noise of lamentation. The noise came from the village, and was
general enough to assure him that a chief was dead. It rose in a chorus
of discordant howls, low in note and very long drawn out—wordless,
something like the howls of an animal in pain, and yet human by reason
of their infinite melancholy.

Walker pushed forward, came out upon a hillock fronting the palisade
which closed the entrance to the single street of huts, and passed down
into the village. It seemed as though he had been expected. For from
every hut the Fans rushed out towards him, the men dressed in their
filthiest rags, the women with their faces chalked and their heads
shaved. They stopped, however, on seeing a white man, and Walker knew
enough of their tongue to ascertain that they looked for the coming of
the witch-doctor. The chief, it appeared, had died a natural death, and
since the event is of sufficiently rare occurrence in the Fan country,
it had promptly been attributed to witchcraft, and the witch-doctor had
been sent for to discover the criminal. The village was consequently in
a lively state of apprehension, for the end of those who bewitch chiefs
to death is not easy. The Fans, however, politely invited Walker to
inspect the corpse. It lay in a dark hut, packed with the corpse’s
relations, who were shouting to it at the top of their voices on the
off-chance that its spirit might think better of its conduct and return
to the body. They explained to Walker that they had tried all the usual
varieties of persuasion. They had put red pepper into the chief’s eyes
while he was dying; they had propped open his mouth with a stick; they
had burned fibres of the oil-nut under his nose. In fact they had made
his death as uncomfortable as possible, but none the less he had died.

The witch-doctor arrived on the heels of the explanation, and Walker,
since he was powerless to interfere, thought it wise to retire for a
time. He went back to the hillock on the edge of the trees. Thence he
looked across and over the palisade, and had the whole length of the
street within his view.

The witch-doctor entered in from the opposite end to the beating of many
drums. The first thing Walker noticed was that he wore a square-skirted
eighteenth century coat and a tattered pair of brocaded knee breeches on
his bare legs; the second was that he limped—ever so slightly. Still he
limped, and with the right leg. Walker felt a strong desire to see the
man’s face, and his heart thumped within him as he came nearer and
nearer down the street. But his hair was so matted about his cheeks that
Walker could not distinguish a feature. “If I was only near enough to
see his eyes,” he thought. But he was not near enough, nor would it have
been prudent for him to have gone nearer.

The witch-doctor commenced the proceedings by ringing a handbell in
front of every hut. But that method of detection failed to work. The
bell rang successfully at every door. Walker watched the man’s progress,
watched his trailing limb, and began to discover familiarities in his
manner: “Pure fancy,” he argued with himself. “If he had not limped I
should have noticed nothing.”

Then the doctor took a wicker basket, covered with a rough wooden lid.
The Fans gathered in front of him; he repeated their names one after the
other, and at each name he lifted the lid. But that plan appeared to be
no improvement, for the lid never stuck. It came off readily at each
name. Walker, meanwhile, calculated the distance a man would have to
cover who walked across country from Bonny River to the Ogowe, and he
reflected with some relief that the chances were several thousand to one
that any man who made the attempt, be he black or white, would be eaten
on the way.

The witch-doctor turned back the big square cuffs of his sleeves as a
conjurer will do, and again repeated the names. This time, however, at
each name he rubbed the palms of his hands together. Walker was seized
with a sudden longing to rush down into the village and examine the
man’s right forearm for a bullet mark. The longing grew on him. The
witch-doctor went steadily through the list. Walker rose to his feet and
took a step or two down the hillock, when, of a sudden, at one
particular name, the doctor’s hands flew apart and waved wildly about
him. A single cry from a single voice went up out of the group of Fans.
The group fell back and left one man standing alone. He made no defence,
no resistance. Two men came forward and bound his hands and his feet and
his body with tie-tie. Then they carried him within a hut.

“That’s sheer murder,” thought Walker. He could not rescue the victim,
he knew. But he could get a nearer view of the witch-doctor. Already the
man was packing up his paraphernalia. Walker stepped back among the
trees, and running with all his speed, made the circuit of the village.
He reached the further end of the street just as the witch-doctor walked
out into the open.

Walker ran forward a yard or so until he, too, stood plain to see on the
level ground. The witch-doctor did see him and stopped. He stopped only
for a moment and gazed earnestly in Walker’s direction. Then he went on
again towards his own hut in the forest.

Walker made no attempt to follow him. “He has seen me,” he thought. “If
he knows me he will come down to the river bank to-night.” Consequently,
he made the black rowers camp a couple of hundred yards down stream. He
himself remained alone in his canoe.

The night fell noiseless and black, and the enclosing forest made it yet
blacker. A few stars burned in the strip of sky above his head. Those
stars and the glimmering of the clay bank to which the boat was moored
were the only light which Walker had. It was as dark as that night when
Walker waited for Hatteras at the wicket gate.

He placed his gun and a pouch of cartridges on one side, an unlighted
lantern on the other, and then he took up his banjo, and again he
waited. He waited for a couple of hours, until a light crackle as of
twigs snapping came to him out of the forest. Walker struck a chord on
his banjo, and played a hymn tune. He played, “Abide with me,” thinking
that some picture of a home, of a Sunday evening in England’s summer
time, perhaps of a group of girls singing about a piano, might flash
into the darkened mind of the man upon the bank, and draw him as with
cords. The music went tinkling up and down the river, but no one spoke,
no one moved upon the bank. So Walker changed the tune, and played a
melody of the barrel organs and Piccadilly Circus. He had not played
more than a dozen bars, before he heard a sob from the bank, and then
the sound of something sliding down the clay. The next instant, a figure
shone black against the clay. The boat lurched under the weight of a
foot upon the gunwale, and a man plumped down in front of Walker.

“Well, what is it?” asked Walker, as he laid down his banjo and felt for
a match in his pocket.

It seemed as though the words roused the man to a perception that he had
made a mistake. He said as much hurriedly in trade-English, and sprang
up as though he would leap from the boat. Walker caught hold of his
ankle.

“No, you don’t,” said he; “you must have meant to visit me. This isn’t
Henley,” and he jerked the man back into the bottom of the boat.

The man explained that he had paid a visit out of the purest
friendliness.

“You’re the witch-doctor, I suppose,” said Walker.

The other replied that he was, and proceeded to state that he was
willing to give information about much that made white men curious. He
would explain why it was of singular advantage to possess a white man’s
eyeball, and how very advisable it was to kill anyone you caught making
Itung. The danger of passing near a cotton tree which had red earth at
the roots provided a subject which no prudent man should disregard; and
Tando, with his driver ants, was worth conciliating. The witch-doctor
was prepared to explain to Walker how to conciliate Tando. Walker
replied that it was very kind of the witch-doctor, but Tando did not
really worry him. He was, in fact, very much more worried by an
inability to understand how a native so high up the Ogowe River had
learned to speak trade-English.

The witch-doctor waved the question aside, and remarked that Walker must
have enemies. “Pussin bad too much,” he called them. “Pussin woh-woh.
Berrah well! Ah send grand krau-krau and dem pussin die one time.”

Walker could not recollect for the moment any “pussin” whom he wished to
die one time, whether from grand krau-krau or any other disease. “Wait a
bit,” he continued, “there is one man—Dick Hatteras!” and he struck the
match suddenly. The witch-doctor started forward as though to put it
out.

Walker, however, had the door of the lantern open. He set the match to
the wick of the candle, and closed the door fast. The witch-doctor drew
back. Walker lifted the lantern and threw the light on his face. The
witch-doctor buried his face in his hands, and supported his elbows on
his knees. Immediately Walker darted forward a hand, seized the loose
sleeve of the witch-doctor’s coat, and slipped it back along his arm to
the elbow. It was the sleeve of the right arm, and there on the fleshy
part of the forearm was the scar of a bullet.

“Yes,” said Walker. “By God, it is Dick Hatteras!”

“Well?” cried Hatteras, taking his hands from his face. “What the devil
made you tum-tum ‘Tommy Atkins’ on the banjo? Damn you!”

“Dick, I saw you this afternoon.”

“I know, I know. Why on earth didn’t you kill me that night in your
compound?”

“I mean to make up for that mistake to-night!”

Walker took his rifle on to his knee. Hatteras saw the movement, leaned
forward quickly, snatched up the rifle, snatched up the cartridges,
thrust a couple of cartridges into the breech, and handed the loaded
rifle back to his old friend.

“That’s right,” he said. “I remember. ‘There are some cases neither
God’s law nor man’s law has quite made provision for.’” And then he
stopped, with his finger on his lip. “Listen!” he said.

From the depths of the forest there came faintly, very sweetly the sound
of church-bells ringing—a peal of bells ringing at midnight in the heart
of West Africa. Walker was startled. The sound seemed fairy work, so
faint, so sweet was it.

“It’s no fancy, Jim,” said Hatteras, “I hear them every night, and at
matins and vespers. There was a Jesuit monastery here two hundred years
ago. The bells remain, and some of the clothes.” He touched his coat as
he spoke. “The Fans still ring the bells from habit. Just think of it!
Every morning, every evening, every midnight, I hear those bells. They
talk to me of little churches perched on hillsides in the old country,
of hawthorn lanes, and women—English women. English girls—thousands of
miles away, going along them to church. God help me! Jim, have you got
an English pipe?”

“Yes; an English briarwood and some bird’s-eye.”

Walker handed Hatteras his briarwood and his pouch of tobacco. Hatteras
filled the pipe, lit it at the lantern, and sucked at it avidly for a
moment. Then he gave a sigh and drew in the smoke more slowly and yet
more slowly.

“My wife?” he asked at last, in a low voice.

“She is in England. She thinks you dead.”

Hatteras nodded.

“There’s a jar of Scotch whisky in the locker behind you,” said Walker.

Hatteras turned round, lifted out the jar and a couple of tin cups. He
poured whisky into each and handed one to Walker.

“No, thanks,” said Walker. “I don’t think I will.”

Hatteras looked at his companion for an instant. Then he emptied
deliberately both cups over the side of the boat. Next he took the pipe
from his lips. The tobacco was not half consumed. He poised the pipe for
a little in his hand. Then he blew into the bowl and watched the dull
red glow kindle into sparks of flame as he blew. Very slowly he tapped
the bowl against the thwart of the boat until the burning tobacco fell
with a hiss into the water. He laid the pipe gently down and stood up.

“So long, old man,” he said, and sprang out on the clay. Walker turned
the lantern until the light made a disc upon the bank.

“Good-bye, Jim,” said Hatteras, and he climbed up the bank until he
stood in the light of the lantern. Twice Walker raised the rifle to his
shoulder, twice he lowered it. Then he remembered that Hatteras and he
had been at school together.

“Good-bye, Dicky,” he cried, and fired. Hatteras tumbled down to the
boat-side. The blacks down river were roused by the shot. Walker shouted
to them to stay where they were, and as soon as their camp was quiet he
stepped ashore. He filled up the whisky jar with water, tied it to
Hatteras’ feet, shook his hand, and pushed the body into the river. The
next morning he started back to Fernan Vaz.




End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Twenty-Three Stories by Twenty and
Three Authors, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TWENTY-THREE STORIES, TWENTY-THREE AUTHORS ***

***** This file should be named 62347-0.txt or 62347-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/6/2/3/4/62347/

Produced by Roger Frank and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
