The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Works of Edgar Allan Poe, Volume 5, by Edgar Allan Poe

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: The Works of Edgar Allan Poe, Volume 5

Author: Edgar Allan Poe

Release Date: April, 2000  [Etext #2151]
[Most recently updated: December 12, 2020]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE WORKS OF EDGAR ALLAN POE, VOL. 5 ***



SOME WORDS WITH A MUMMY.


      The _symposium_ of the preceding evening had been a little too much
      for my nerves. I had a wretched headache, and was desperately drowsy.
      Instead of going out therefore to spend the evening as I had proposed, it
      occurred to me that I could not do a wiser thing than just eat a mouthful
      of supper and go immediately to bed.

      A light supper of course. I am exceedingly fond of Welsh rabbit. More than
      a pound at once, however, may not at all times be advisable. Still, there
      can be no material objection to two. And really between two and three,
      there is merely a single unit of difference. I ventured, perhaps, upon
      four. My wife will have it five;—but, clearly, she has confounded
      two very distinct affairs. The abstract number, five, I am willing to
      admit; but, concretely, it has reference to bottles of Brown Stout,
      without which, in the way of condiment, Welsh rabbit is to be eschewed.

      Having thus concluded a frugal meal, and donned my night-cap, with the
      serene hope of enjoying it till noon the next day, I placed my head upon
      the pillow, and, through the aid of a capital conscience, fell into a
      profound slumber forthwith.

      But when were the hopes of humanity fulfilled? I could not have completed
      my third snore when there came a furious ringing at the street-door bell,
      and then an impatient thumping at the knocker, which awakened me at once.
      In a minute afterward, and while I was still rubbing my eyes, my wife
      thrust in my face a note, from my old friend, Doctor Ponnonner. It ran
      thus:


“Come to me, by all means, my dear good friend, as soon as you receive
this. Come and help us to rejoice. At last, by long persevering diplomacy, I
have gained the assent of the Directors of the City Museum, to my examination
of the Mummy—you know the one I mean. I have permission to unswathe it
and open it, if desirable. A few friends only will be present—you, of
course. The Mummy is now at my house, and we shall begin to unroll it at eleven
to-night.

           “Yours, ever,
                   PONNONNER.


      By the time I had reached the “Ponnonner,” it struck me that I was as wide
      awake as a man need be. I leaped out of bed in an ecstacy, overthrowing
      all in my way; dressed myself with a rapidity truly marvellous; and set
      off, at the top of my speed, for the doctor’s.

      There I found a very eager company assembled. They had been awaiting me
      with much impatience; the Mummy was extended upon the dining-table; and
      the moment I entered its examination was commenced.

      It was one of a pair brought, several years previously, by Captain Arthur
      Sabretash, a cousin of Ponnonner’s from a tomb near Eleithias, in
      the Lybian mountains, a considerable distance above Thebes on the Nile.
      The grottoes at this point, although less magnificent than the Theban
      sepulchres, are of higher interest, on account of affording more numerous
      illustrations of the private life of the Egyptians. The chamber from
      which our specimen was taken, was said to be very rich in such
      illustrations—the walls being completely covered with fresco
      paintings and bas-reliefs, while statues, vases, and Mosaic work of rich
      patterns, indicated the vast wealth of the deceased.

      The treasure had been deposited in the Museum precisely in the same
      condition in which Captain Sabretash had found it—that is to say,
      the coffin had not been disturbed. For eight years it had thus stood,
      subject only externally to public inspection. We had now, therefore, the
      complete Mummy at our disposal; and to those who are aware how very rarely
      the unransacked antique reaches our shores, it will be evident, at once
      that we had great reason to congratulate ourselves upon our good fortune.

      Approaching the table, I saw on it a large box, or case, nearly seven feet
      long, and perhaps three feet wide, by two feet and a half deep. It was
      oblong—not coffin-shaped. The material was at first supposed to be
      the wood of the sycamore (_platanus_), but, upon cutting into it, we
      found it to be pasteboard, or, more properly, _papier mache_,
      composed of papyrus. It was thickly ornamented with paintings,
      representing funeral scenes, and other mournful subjects—interspersed
      among which, in every variety of position, were certain series of
      hieroglyphical characters, intended, no doubt, for the name of the
      departed. By good luck, Mr. Gliddon formed one of our party; and he had no
      difficulty in translating the letters, which were simply phonetic, and
      represented the word _Allamistakeo_.

      We had some difficulty in getting this case open without injury; but
      having at length accomplished the task, we came to a second,
      coffin-shaped, and very considerably less in size than the exterior one,
      but resembling it precisely in every other respect. The interval between
      the two was filled with resin, which had, in some degree, defaced the
      colors of the interior box.

      Upon opening this latter (which we did quite easily), we arrived at a
      third case, also coffin-shaped, and varying from the second one in no
      particular, except in that of its material, which was cedar, and still
      emitted the peculiar and highly aromatic odor of that wood. Between the
      second and the third case there was no interval—the one fitting
      accurately within the other.

      Removing the third case, we discovered and took out the body itself. We
      had expected to find it, as usual, enveloped in frequent rolls, or
      bandages, of linen; but, in place of these, we found a sort of sheath,
      made of papyrus, and coated with a layer of plaster, thickly gilt and
      painted. The paintings represented subjects connected with the various
      supposed duties of the soul, and its presentation to different divinities,
      with numerous identical human figures, intended, very probably, as
      portraits of the persons embalmed. Extending from head to foot was a
      columnar, or perpendicular, inscription, in phonetic hieroglyphics, giving
      again his name and titles, and the names and titles of his relations.

      Around the neck thus ensheathed, was a collar of cylindrical glass beads,
      diverse in color, and so arranged as to form images of deities, of the
      scarabaeus, etc., with the winged globe. Around the small of the waist
      was a similar collar or belt.

      Stripping off the papyrus, we found the flesh in excellent preservation,
      with no perceptible odor. The color was reddish. The skin was hard,
      smooth, and glossy. The teeth and hair were in good condition. The eyes
      (it seemed) had been removed, and glass ones substituted, which were very
      beautiful and wonderfully life-like, with the exception of somewhat too
      determined a stare. The fingers and the nails were brilliantly gilded.

      Mr. Gliddon was of opinion, from the redness of the epidermis, that the
      embalmment had been effected altogether by asphaltum; but, on scraping the
      surface with a steel instrument, and throwing into the fire some of the
      powder thus obtained, the flavor of camphor and other sweet-scented gums
      became apparent.

      We searched the corpse very carefully for the usual openings through which
      the entrails are extracted, but, to our surprise, we could discover none.
      No member of the party was at that period aware that entire or unopened
      mummies are not infrequently met. The brain it was customary to withdraw
      through the nose; the intestines through an incision in the side; the body
      was then shaved, washed, and salted; then laid aside for several weeks,
      when the operation of embalming, properly so called, began.

      As no trace of an opening could be found, Doctor Ponnonner was preparing
      his instruments for dissection, when I observed that it was then past two
      o’clock. Hereupon it was agreed to postpone the internal examination until
      the next evening; and we were about to separate for the present, when some
      one suggested an experiment or two with the Voltaic pile.

      The application of electricity to a mummy three or four thousand years old
      at the least, was an idea, if not very sage, still sufficiently original,
      and we all caught it at once. About one-tenth in earnest and nine-tenths
      in jest, we arranged a battery in the Doctor’s study, and conveyed thither
      the Egyptian.

      It was only after much trouble that we succeeded in laying bare some
      portions of the temporal muscle which appeared of less stony rigidity than
      other parts of the frame, but which, as we had anticipated, of course,
      gave no indication of galvanic susceptibility when brought in contact with
      the wire. This, the first trial, indeed, seemed decisive, and, with a
      hearty laugh at our own absurdity, we were bidding each other good night,
      when my eyes, happening to fall upon those of the Mummy, were there
      immediately riveted in amazement. My brief glance, in fact, had sufficed
      to assure me that the orbs which we had all supposed to be glass, and
      which were originally noticeable for a certain wild stare, were now so far
      covered by the lids, that only a small portion of the _tunica albuginea_
      remained visible.

      With a shout I called attention to the fact, and it became immediately
      obvious to all.

      I cannot say that I was alarmed at the phenomenon, because “alarmed” is,
      in my case, not exactly the word. It is possible, however, that, but for
      the Brown Stout, I might have been a little nervous. As for the rest of
      the company, they really made no attempt at concealing the downright
      fright which possessed them. Doctor Ponnonner was a man to be pitied. Mr.
      Gliddon, by some peculiar process, rendered himself invisible. Mr. Silk
      Buckingham, I fancy, will scarcely be so bold as to deny that he made his
      way, upon all fours, under the table.

      After the first shock of astonishment, however, we resolved, as a matter
      of course, upon further experiment forthwith. Our operations were now
      directed against the great toe of the right foot. We made an incision over
      the outside of the exterior _os sesamoideum pollicis pedis,_ and thus
      got at the root of the abductor muscle. Readjusting the battery, we now
      applied the fluid to the bisected nerves—when, with a movement of
      exceeding life-likeness, the Mummy first drew up its right knee so as to
      bring it nearly in contact with the abdomen, and then, straightening the
      limb with inconceivable force, bestowed a kick upon Doctor Ponnonner,
      which had the effect of discharging that gentleman, like an arrow from a
      catapult, through a window into the street below.

      We rushed out _en masse_ to bring in the mangled remains of the
      victim, but had the happiness to meet him upon the staircase, coming up in
      an unaccountable hurry, brimful of the most ardent philosophy, and more
      than ever impressed with the necessity of prosecuting our experiment with
      vigor and with zeal.

      It was by his advice, accordingly, that we made, upon the spot, a profound
      incision into the tip of the subject’s nose, while the Doctor himself,
      laying violent hands upon it, pulled it into vehement contact with the
      wire.

      Morally and physically—figuratively and literally—was the
      effect electric. In the first place, the corpse opened its eyes and winked
      very rapidly for several minutes, as does Mr. Barnes in the pantomime; in
      the second place, it sneezed; in the third, it sat upon end; in the
      fourth, it shook its fist in Doctor Ponnonner’s face; in the fifth,
      turning to Messieurs Gliddon and Buckingham, it addressed them, in very
      capital Egyptian, thus:

      “I must say, gentlemen, that I am as much surprised as I am mortified at
      your behavior. Of Doctor Ponnonner nothing better was to be expected. He
      is a poor little fat fool who knows no better. I pity and forgive him. But
      you, Mr. Gliddon—and you, Silk—who have travelled and resided
      in Egypt until one might imagine you to the manor born—you, I say
      who have been so much among us that you speak Egyptian fully as well, I
      think, as you write your mother tongue—you, whom I have always been
      led to regard as the firm friend of the mummies—I really did
      anticipate more gentlemanly conduct from you. What am I to think of your
      standing quietly by and seeing me thus unhandsomely used? What am I to
      suppose by your permitting Tom, Dick, and Harry to strip me of my coffins,
      and my clothes, in this wretchedly cold climate? In what light (to come to
      the point) am I to regard your aiding and abetting that miserable little
      villain, Doctor Ponnonner, in pulling me by the nose?”


      It will be taken for granted, no doubt, that upon hearing this speech
      under the circumstances, we all either made for the door, or fell into
      violent hysterics, or went off in a general swoon. One of these three
      things was, I say, to be expected. Indeed each and all of these lines of
      conduct might have been very plausibly pursued. And, upon my word, I am at
      a loss to know how or why it was that we pursued neither the one nor the
      other. But, perhaps, the true reason is to be sought in the spirit of the
      age, which proceeds by the rule of contraries altogether, and is now
      usually admitted as the solution of every thing in the way of paradox and
      impossibility. Or, perhaps, after all, it was only the Mummy’s exceedingly
      natural and matter-of-course air that divested his words of the terrible.
      However this may be, the facts are clear, and no member of our party
      betrayed any very particular trepidation, or seemed to consider that any
      thing had gone very especially wrong.

      For my part I was convinced it was all right, and merely stepped aside,
      out of the range of the Egyptian’s fist. Doctor Ponnonner thrust his hands
      into his breeches’ pockets, looked hard at the Mummy, and grew excessively
      red in the face. Mr. Glidden stroked his whiskers and drew up the collar
      of his shirt. Mr. Buckingham hung down his head, and put his right thumb
      into the left corner of his mouth.

      The Egyptian regarded him with a severe countenance for some minutes and
      at length, with a sneer, said:

      “Why don’t you speak, Mr. Buckingham? Did you hear what I asked you, or
      not? Do take your thumb out of your mouth!”


      Mr. Buckingham, hereupon, gave a slight start, took his right thumb out of
      the left corner of his mouth, and, by way of indemnification inserted his
      left thumb in the right corner of the aperture above-mentioned.

      Not being able to get an answer from Mr. B., the figure turned peevishly
      to Mr. Gliddon, and, in a peremptory tone, demanded in general terms what
      we all meant.

      Mr. Gliddon replied at great length, in phonetics; and but for the
      deficiency of American printing-offices in hieroglyphical type, it would
      afford me much pleasure to record here, in the original, the whole of his
      very excellent speech.

      I may as well take this occasion to remark, that all the subsequent
      conversation in which the Mummy took a part, was carried on in primitive
      Egyptian, through the medium (so far as concerned myself and other
      untravelled members of the company)—through the medium, I say, of
      Messieurs Gliddon and Buckingham, as interpreters. These gentlemen spoke
      the mother tongue of the Mummy with inimitable fluency and grace; but I
      could not help observing that (owing, no doubt, to the introduction of
      images entirely modern, and, of course, entirely novel to the stranger)
      the two travellers were reduced, occasionally, to the employment of
      sensible forms for the purpose of conveying a particular meaning. Mr.
      Gliddon, at one period, for example, could not make the Egyptian
      comprehend the term “politics,” until he sketched upon the wall, with a
      bit of charcoal a little carbuncle-nosed gentleman, out at elbows,
      standing upon a stump, with his left leg drawn back, right arm thrown
      forward, with his fist shut, the eyes rolled up toward Heaven, and the
      mouth open at an angle of ninety degrees. Just in the same way Mr.
      Buckingham failed to convey the absolutely modern idea “wig,” until (at
      Doctor Ponnonner’s suggestion) he grew very pale in the face, and
      consented to take off his own.

      It will be readily understood that Mr. Gliddon’s discourse turned chiefly
      upon the vast benefits accruing to science from the unrolling and
      disembowelling of mummies; apologizing, upon this score, for any
      disturbance that might have been occasioned him, in particular, the
      individual Mummy called Allamistakeo; and concluding with a mere hint (for
      it could scarcely be considered more) that, as these little matters were
      now explained, it might be as well to proceed with the investigation
      intended. Here Doctor Ponnonner made ready his instruments.

      In regard to the latter suggestions of the orator, it appears that
      Allamistakeo had certain scruples of conscience, the nature of which I did
      not distinctly learn; but he expressed himself satisfied with the
      apologies tendered, and, getting down from the table, shook hands with the
      company all round.

      When this ceremony was at an end, we immediately busied ourselves in
      repairing the damages which our subject had sustained from the scalpel. We
      sewed up the wound in his temple, bandaged his foot, and applied a square
      inch of black plaster to the tip of his nose.

      It was now observed that the Count (this was the title, it seems, of
      Allamistakeo) had a slight fit of shivering—no doubt from the cold.
      The Doctor immediately repaired to his wardrobe, and soon returned with a
      black dress coat, made in Jennings’ best manner, a pair of sky-blue plaid
      pantaloons with straps, a pink gingham chemise, a flapped vest of brocade,
      a white sack overcoat, a walking cane with a hook, a hat with no brim,
      patent-leather boots, straw-colored kid gloves, an eye-glass, a pair of
      whiskers, and a waterfall cravat. Owing to the disparity of size between
      the Count and the doctor (the proportion being as two to one), there was
      some little difficulty in adjusting these habiliments upon the person of
      the Egyptian; but when all was arranged, he might have been said to be
      dressed. Mr. Gliddon, therefore, gave him his arm, and led him to a
      comfortable chair by the fire, while the Doctor rang the bell upon the
      spot and ordered a supply of cigars and wine.

      The conversation soon grew animated. Much curiosity was, of course,
      expressed in regard to the somewhat remarkable fact of Allamistakeo’s
      still remaining alive.

      “I should have thought,” observed Mr. Buckingham, “that it is high time
      you were dead.”


      “Why,” replied the Count, very much astonished, “I am little more than
      seven hundred years old! My father lived a thousand, and was by no means
      in his dotage when he died.”


      Here ensued a brisk series of questions and computations, by means of
      which it became evident that the antiquity of the Mummy had been grossly
      misjudged. It had been five thousand and fifty years and some months since
      he had been consigned to the catacombs at Eleithias.

      “But my remark,” resumed Mr. Buckingham, “had no reference to your age at
      the period of interment (I am willing to grant, in fact, that you are
      still a young man), and my illusion was to the immensity of time during
      which, by your own showing, you must have been done up in asphaltum.”


      “In what?” said the Count.

      “In asphaltum,” persisted Mr. B.

      “Ah, yes; I have some faint notion of what you mean; it might be made to
      answer, no doubt—but in my time we employed scarcely any thing else
      than the Bichloride of Mercury.”


      “But what we are especially at a loss to understand,” said Doctor
      Ponnonner, “is how it happens that, having been dead and buried in Egypt
      five thousand years ago, you are here to-day all alive and looking so
      delightfully well.”


      “Had I been, as you say, dead,” replied the Count, “it is more than
      probable that dead, I should still be; for I perceive you are yet in the
      infancy of Galvanism, and cannot accomplish with it what was a common
      thing among us in the old days. But the fact is, I fell into catalepsy,
      and it was considered by my best friends that I was either dead or should
      be; they accordingly embalmed me at once—I presume you are aware of
      the chief principle of the embalming process?”


      “Why, not altogether.”


      “Ah, I perceive—a deplorable condition of ignorance! Well I cannot
      enter into details just now: but it is necessary to explain that to embalm
      (properly speaking), in Egypt, was to arrest indefinitely all the animal
      functions subjected to the process. I use the word ‘animal’ in its widest
      sense, as including the physical not more than the moral and vital being.
      I repeat that the leading principle of embalmment consisted, with us, in
      the immediately arresting, and holding in perpetual abeyance, all the
      animal functions subjected to the process. To be brief, in whatever
      condition the individual was, at the period of embalmment, in that
      condition he remained. Now, as it is my good fortune to be of the blood of
      the Scarabaeus, I was embalmed alive, as you see me at present.”


      “The blood of the Scarabaeus!” exclaimed Doctor Ponnonner.

      “Yes. The Scarabaeus was the insignium or the ‘arms,’ of a very
      distinguished and very rare patrician family. To be ‘of the blood of the
      Scarabaeus,’ is merely to be one of that family of which the Scarabaeus is
      the insignium. I speak figuratively.”


      “But what has this to do with you being alive?”


      “Why, it is the general custom in Egypt to deprive a corpse, before
      embalmment, of its bowels and brains; the race of the Scarabaei alone did
      not coincide with the custom. Had I not been a Scarabeus, therefore, I
      should have been without bowels and brains; and without either it is
      inconvenient to live.”


      “I perceive that,” said Mr. Buckingham, “and I presume that all the entire
      mummies that come to hand are of the race of Scarabaei.”


      “Beyond doubt.”


      “I thought,” said Mr. Gliddon, very meekly, “that the Scarabaeus was one
      of the Egyptian gods.”


      “One of the Egyptian _what?”_ exclaimed the Mummy, starting to its
      feet.

      “Gods!” repeated the traveller.

      “Mr. Gliddon, I really am astonished to hear you talk in this style,” said
      the Count, resuming his chair. “No nation upon the face of the earth has
      ever acknowledged more than one god. The Scarabaeus, the Ibis, etc., were
      with us (as similar creatures have been with others) the symbols, or
      media, through which we offered worship to the Creator too august to be
      more directly approached.”


      There was here a pause. At length the colloquy was renewed by Doctor
      Ponnonner.

      “It is not improbable, then, from what you have explained,” said he, “that
      among the catacombs near the Nile there may exist other mummies of the
      Scarabaeus tribe, in a condition of vitality?”


      “There can be no question of it,” replied the Count; “all the Scarabaei
      embalmed accidentally while alive, are alive now. Even some of those
      purposely so embalmed, may have been overlooked by their executors, and
      still remain in the tomb.”


      “Will you be kind enough to explain,” I said, “what you mean by ‘purposely
      so embalmed’?”


      “With great pleasure!” answered the Mummy, after surveying me leisurely
      through his eye-glass—for it was the first time I had ventured to
      address him a direct question.

      “With great pleasure,” he said. “The usual duration of man’s life, in my
      time, was about eight hundred years. Few men died, unless by most
      extraordinary accident, before the age of six hundred; few lived longer
      than a decade of centuries; but eight were considered the natural term.
      After the discovery of the embalming principle, as I have already
      described it to you, it occurred to our philosophers that a laudable
      curiosity might be gratified, and, at the same time, the interests of
      science much advanced, by living this natural term in installments. In the
      case of history, indeed, experience demonstrated that something of this
      kind was indispensable. An historian, for example, having attained the age
      of five hundred, would write a book with great labor and then get himself
      carefully embalmed; leaving instructions to his executors pro tem., that
      they should cause him to be revivified after the lapse of a certain period—say
      five or six hundred years. Resuming existence at the expiration of this
      time, he would invariably find his great work converted into a species of
      hap-hazard note-book—that is to say, into a kind of literary arena
      for the conflicting guesses, riddles, and personal squabbles of whole
      herds of exasperated commentators. These guesses, etc., which passed under
      the name of annotations, or emendations, were found so completely to have
      enveloped, distorted, and overwhelmed the text, that the author had to go
      about with a lantern to discover his own book. When discovered, it was
      never worth the trouble of the search. After re-writing it throughout, it
      was regarded as the bounden duty of the historian to set himself to work
      immediately in correcting, from his own private knowledge and experience,
      the traditions of the day concerning the epoch at which he had originally
      lived. Now this process of re-scription and personal rectification,
      pursued by various individual sages from time to time, had the effect of
      preventing our history from degenerating into absolute fable.”


      “I beg your pardon,” said Doctor Ponnonner at this point, laying his hand
      gently upon the arm of the Egyptian—“I beg your pardon, sir, but may
      I presume to interrupt you for one moment?”


      “By all means, sir,” replied the Count, drawing up.

      “I merely wished to ask you a question,” said the Doctor. “You mentioned
      the historian’s personal correction of traditions respecting his own
      epoch. Pray, sir, upon an average what proportion of these Kabbala were
      usually found to be right?”


      “The Kabbala, as you properly term them, sir, were generally discovered to
      be precisely on a par with the facts recorded in the un-re-written
      histories themselves;—that is to say, not one individual iota of
      either was ever known, under any circumstances, to be not totally and
      radically wrong.”


      “But since it is quite clear,” resumed the Doctor, “that at least five
      thousand years have elapsed since your entombment, I take it for granted
      that your histories at that period, if not your traditions were
      sufficiently explicit on that one topic of universal interest, the
      Creation, which took place, as I presume you are aware, only about ten
      centuries before.”


      “Sir!” said the Count Allamistakeo.

      The Doctor repeated his remarks, but it was only after much additional
      explanation that the foreigner could be made to comprehend them. The
      latter at length said, hesitatingly:

      “The ideas you have suggested are to me, I confess, utterly novel. During
      my time I never knew any one to entertain so singular a fancy as that the
      universe (or this world if you will have it so) ever had a beginning at
      all. I remember once, and once only, hearing something remotely hinted, by
      a man of many speculations, concerning the origin _of the human race;_
      and by this individual, the very word _Adam_ (or Red Earth), which
      you make use of, was employed. He employed it, however, in a generical
      sense, with reference to the spontaneous germination from rank soil (just
      as a thousand of the lower genera of creatures are germinated)—the
      spontaneous germination, I say, of five vast hordes of men, simultaneously
      upspringing in five distinct and nearly equal divisions of the globe.”


      Here, in general, the company shrugged their shoulders, and one or two of
      us touched our foreheads with a very significant air. Mr. Silk Buckingham,
      first glancing slightly at the occiput and then at the sinciput of
      Allamistakeo, spoke as follows:

      “The long duration of human life in your time, together with the
      occasional practice of passing it, as you have explained, in installments,
      must have had, indeed, a strong tendency to the general development and
      conglomeration of knowledge. I presume, therefore, that we are to
      attribute the marked inferiority of the old Egyptians in all particulars
      of science, when compared with the moderns, and more especially with the
      Yankees, altogether to the superior solidity of the Egyptian skull.”


      “I confess again,” replied the Count, with much suavity, “that I am
      somewhat at a loss to comprehend you; pray, to what particulars of science
      do you allude?”


      Here our whole party, joining voices, detailed, at great length, the
      assumptions of phrenology and the marvels of animal magnetism.

      Having heard us to an end, the Count proceeded to relate a few anecdotes,
      which rendered it evident that prototypes of Gall and Spurzheim had
      flourished and faded in Egypt so long ago as to have been nearly
      forgotten, and that the manoeuvres of Mesmer were really very contemptible
      tricks when put in collation with the positive miracles of the Theban
      savans, who created lice and a great many other similar things.

      I here asked the Count if his people were able to calculate eclipses. He
      smiled rather contemptuously, and said they were.

      This put me a little out, but I began to make other inquiries in regard to
      his astronomical knowledge, when a member of the company, who had never as
      yet opened his mouth, whispered in my ear, that for information on this
      head, I had better consult Ptolemy (whoever Ptolemy is), as well as one
      Plutarch de facie lunae.

      I then questioned the Mummy about burning-glasses and lenses, and, in
      general, about the manufacture of glass; but I had not made an end of my
      queries before the silent member again touched me quietly on the elbow,
      and begged me for God’s sake to take a peep at Diodorus Siculus. As for
      the Count, he merely asked me, in the way of reply, if we moderns
      possessed any such microscopes as would enable us to cut cameos in the
      style of the Egyptians. While I was thinking how I should answer this
      question, little Doctor Ponnonner committed himself in a very
      extraordinary way.

      “Look at our architecture!” he exclaimed, greatly to the indignation of
      both the travellers, who pinched him black and blue to no purpose.

      “Look,” he cried with enthusiasm, “at the Bowling-Green Fountain in New
      York! or if this be too vast a contemplation, regard for a moment the
      Capitol at Washington, D. C.!”—and the good little medical man went
      on to detail very minutely, the proportions of the fabric to which he
      referred. He explained that the portico alone was adorned with no less
      than four and twenty columns, five feet in diameter, and ten feet apart.

      The Count said that he regretted not being able to remember, just at that
      moment, the precise dimensions of any one of the principal buildings of
      the city of Aznac, whose foundations were laid in the night of Time, but
      the ruins of which were still standing, at the epoch of his entombment, in
      a vast plain of sand to the westward of Thebes. He recollected, however,
      (talking of the porticoes,) that one affixed to an inferior palace in a
      kind of suburb called Carnac, consisted of a hundred and forty-four
      columns, thirty-seven feet in circumference, and twenty-five feet apart.
      The approach to this portico, from the Nile, was through an avenue two
      miles long, composed of sphynxes, statues, and obelisks, twenty, sixty,
      and a hundred feet in height. The palace itself (as well as he could
      remember) was, in one direction, two miles long, and might have been
      altogether about seven in circuit. Its walls were richly painted all over,
      within and without, with hieroglyphics. He would not pretend to assert
      that even fifty or sixty of the Doctor’s Capitols might have been built
      within these walls, but he was by no means sure that two or three hundred
      of them might not have been squeezed in with some trouble. That palace at
      Carnac was an insignificant little building after all. He (the Count),
      however, could not conscientiously refuse to admit the ingenuity,
      magnificence, and superiority of the Fountain at the Bowling Green, as
      described by the Doctor. Nothing like it, he was forced to allow, had ever
      been seen in Egypt or elsewhere.

      I here asked the Count what he had to say to our railroads.

      “Nothing,” he replied, “in particular.” They were rather slight, rather
      ill-conceived, and clumsily put together. They could not be compared, of
      course, with the vast, level, direct, iron-grooved causeways upon which
      the Egyptians conveyed entire temples and solid obelisks of a hundred and
      fifty feet in altitude.

      I spoke of our gigantic mechanical forces.

      He agreed that we knew something in that way, but inquired how I should
      have gone to work in getting up the imposts on the lintels of even the
      little palace at Carnac.

      This question I concluded not to hear, and demanded if he had any idea of
      Artesian wells; but he simply raised his eyebrows; while Mr. Gliddon
      winked at me very hard and said, in a low tone, that one had been recently
      discovered by the engineers employed to bore for water in the Great Oasis.

      I then mentioned our steel; but the foreigner elevated his nose, and asked
      me if our steel could have executed the sharp carved work seen on the
      obelisks, and which was wrought altogether by edge-tools of copper.

      This disconcerted us so greatly that we thought it advisable to vary the
      attack to Metaphysics. We sent for a copy of a book called the “Dial,” and
      read out of it a chapter or two about something that is not very clear,
      but which the Bostonians call the Great Movement of Progress.

      The Count merely said that Great Movements were awfully common things in
      his day, and as for Progress, it was at one time quite a nuisance, but it
      never progressed.

      We then spoke of the great beauty and importance of Democracy, and were at
      much trouble in impressing the Count with a due sense of the advantages we
      enjoyed in living where there was suffrage ad libitum, and no king.

      He listened with marked interest, and in fact seemed not a little amused.
      When we had done, he said that, a great while ago, there had occurred
      something of a very similar sort. Thirteen Egyptian provinces determined
      all at once to be free, and to set a magnificent example to the rest of
      mankind. They assembled their wise men, and concocted the most ingenious
      constitution it is possible to conceive. For a while they managed
      remarkably well; only their habit of bragging was prodigious. The thing
      ended, however, in the consolidation of the thirteen states, with some
      fifteen or twenty others, in the most odious and insupportable despotism
      that was ever heard of upon the face of the Earth.

      I asked what was the name of the usurping tyrant.

      As well as the Count could recollect, it was Mob.

      Not knowing what to say to this, I raised my voice, and deplored the
      Egyptian ignorance of steam.

      The Count looked at me with much astonishment, but made no answer. The
      silent gentleman, however, gave me a violent nudge in the ribs with his
      elbows—told me I had sufficiently exposed myself for once—and
      demanded if I was really such a fool as not to know that the modern
      steam-engine is derived from the invention of Hero, through Solomon de
      Caus.

      We were now in imminent danger of being discomfited; but, as good luck
      would have it, Doctor Ponnonner, having rallied, returned to our rescue,
      and inquired if the people of Egypt would seriously pretend to rival the
      moderns in the all-important particular of dress.

      The Count, at this, glanced downward to the straps of his pantaloons, and
      then taking hold of the end of one of his coat-tails, held it up close to
      his eyes for some minutes. Letting it fall, at last, his mouth extended
      itself very gradually from ear to ear; but I do not remember that he said
      any thing in the way of reply.

      Hereupon we recovered our spirits, and the Doctor, approaching the Mummy
      with great dignity, desired it to say candidly, upon its honor as a
      gentleman, if the Egyptians had comprehended, at any period, the
      manufacture of either Ponnonner’s lozenges or Brandreth’s pills.

      We looked, with profound anxiety, for an answer—but in vain. It was
      not forthcoming. The Egyptian blushed and hung down his head. Never was
      triumph more consummate; never was defeat borne with so ill a grace.
      Indeed, I could not endure the spectacle of the poor Mummy’s
      mortification. I reached my hat, bowed to him stiffly, and took leave.

      Upon getting home I found it past four o’clock, and went immediately to
      bed. It is now ten A.M. I have been up since seven, penning these
      memoranda for the benefit of my family and of mankind. The former I shall
      behold no more. My wife is a shrew. The truth is, I am heartily sick of
      this life and of the nineteenth century in general. I am convinced that
      every thing is going wrong. Besides, I am anxious to know who will be
      President in 2045. As soon, therefore, as I shave and swallow a cup of
      coffee, I shall just step over to Ponnonner’s and get embalmed for a
      couple of hundred years.



End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Works of Edgar Allan Poe, Volume 5, by Edgar Allan Poe

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE WORKS OF EDGAR ALLAN POE, VOL. 5 ***

***** This file should be named 2151-0.txt or 2151-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/1/5/2151/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
